



ANNE of the ISLAND

by Lucy Maud Montgomery




     to

     all the girls
     all over the world
     who have "wanted more"
     about ANNE



     All precious things discovered late
     To those that seek them issue forth,
     For Love in sequel works with Fate,
     And draws the veil from hidden worth.
     --TENNYSON



     Table of Contents

     I       The Shadow of Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     II      Garlands of Autumn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
     III     Greeting and Farewell. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
     IV      April's Lady . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
     V       Letters from Home. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
     VI      In the Park. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
     VII     Home Again . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
     VIII    Anne's First Proposal. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .105
     IX      An Unwelcome Lover and a Welcome Friend. . . . . . .113
     X       Patty's Place. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .126
     XI      The Round of Life. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .139
     XII     "Averil's Atonement" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .153
     XIII    The Way of Transgressors . . . . . . . . . . . . . .165
     XIV     The Summons. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .181
     XV      A Dream Turned Upside Down . . . . . . . . . . . . .194
     XVI     Adjusted Relationships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .202
     XVII    A Letter from Davy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .219
     XVIII   Miss Josephine Remembers the Anne-girl . . . . . . .225
     XIX     An Interlude . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .234
     XX      Gilbert Speaks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .240
     XXI     Roses of Yesterday . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .249
     XXII    Spring and Anne Return to Green Gables . . . . . . .256
     XXIII   Paul Cannot Find the Rock People . . . . . . . . . .263
     XXIV    Enter Jonas. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .269
     XXV     Enter Prince Charming. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .278
     XXVI    Enter Christine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .288
     XXVII   Mutual Confidences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .294
     XXVIII  A June Evening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .303
     XXIX    Diana's Wedding. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .311
     XXX     Mrs. Skinner's Romance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .317
     XXXI    Anne to Philippa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .323
     XXXII   Tea with Mrs. Douglas. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .328
     XXXIII  "He Just Kept Coming and Coming" . . . . . . . . . .336
     XXXIV   John Douglas Speaks at Last. . . . . . . . . . . . .342
     XXXV    The Last Redmond Year Opens. . . . . . . . . . . . .350
     XXXV1   The Gardners' Call . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .361
     XXXVII  Full-fledged B.A.'s. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .370
     XXXVIII False Dawn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .379
     XXXIX   Deals with Weddings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .388
     XL      A Book of Revelation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .400
     XLI     Love Takes Up the Glass of Time. . . . . . . . . . .407





ANNE of the ISLAND

by Lucy Maud Montgomery




Chapter I

The Shadow of Change


"Harvest is ended and summer is gone," quoted Anne Shirley, gazing
across the shorn fields dreamily. She and Diana Barry had been picking
apples in the Green Gables orchard, but were now resting from their
labors in a sunny corner, where airy fleets of thistledown drifted by
on the wings of a wind that was still summer-sweet with the incense of
ferns in the Haunted Wood.

But everything in the landscape around them spoke of autumn. The sea was
roaring hollowly in the distance, the fields were bare and sere, scarfed
with golden rod, the brook valley below Green Gables overflowed
with asters of ethereal purple, and the Lake of Shining Waters was
blue--blue--blue; not the changeful blue of spring, nor the pale azure
of summer, but a clear, steadfast, serene blue, as if the water
were past all moods and tenses of emotion and had settled down to a
tranquility unbroken by fickle dreams.

"It has been a nice summer," said Diana, twisting the new ring on her
left hand with a smile. "And Miss Lavendar's wedding seemed to come as
a sort of crown to it. I suppose Mr. and Mrs. Irving are on the Pacific
coast now."

"It seems to me they have been gone long enough to go around the world,"
sighed Anne.

"I can't believe it is only a week since they were married. Everything
has changed. Miss Lavendar and Mr. and Mrs. Allan gone--how lonely the
manse looks with the shutters all closed! I went past it last night, and
it made me feel as if everybody in it had died."

"We'll never get another minister as nice as Mr. Allan," said Diana,
with gloomy conviction. "I suppose we'll have all kinds of supplies this
winter, and half the Sundays no preaching at all. And you and Gilbert
gone--it will be awfully dull."

"Fred will be here," insinuated Anne slyly.

"When is Mrs. Lynde going to move up?" asked Diana, as if she had not
heard Anne's remark.

"Tomorrow. I'm glad she's coming--but it will be another change. Marilla
and I cleared everything out of the spare room yesterday. Do you know,
I hated to do it? Of course, it was silly--but it did seem as if we
were committing sacrilege. That old spare room has always seemed like
a shrine to me. When I was a child I thought it the most wonderful
apartment in the world. You remember what a consuming desire I had to
sleep in a spare room bed--but not the Green Gables spare room. Oh, no,
never there! It would have been too terrible--I couldn't have slept a
wink from awe. I never WALKED through that room when Marilla sent me in
on an errand--no, indeed, I tiptoed through it and held my breath, as if
I were in church, and felt relieved when I got out of it. The pictures
of George Whitefield and the Duke of Wellington hung there, one on each
side of the mirror, and frowned so sternly at me all the time I was in,
especially if I dared peep in the mirror, which was the only one in the
house that didn't twist my face a little. I always wondered how Marilla
dared houseclean that room. And now it's not only cleaned but stripped
bare. George Whitefield and the Duke have been relegated to the upstairs
hall. 'So passes the glory of this world,'" concluded Anne, with a
laugh in which there was a little note of regret. It is never pleasant
to have our old shrines desecrated, even when we have outgrown them.

"I'll be so lonesome when you go," moaned Diana for the hundredth time.
"And to think you go next week!"

"But we're together still," said Anne cheerily. "We mustn't let next
week rob us of this week's joy. I hate the thought of going myself--home
and I are such good friends. Talk of being lonesome! It's I who should
groan. YOU'LL be here with any number of your old friends--AND Fred!
While I shall be alone among strangers, not knowing a soul!"

"EXCEPT Gilbert--AND Charlie Sloane," said Diana, imitating Anne's
italics and slyness.

"Charlie Sloane will be a great comfort, of course," agreed Anne
sarcastically; whereupon both those irresponsible damsels laughed. Diana
knew exactly what Anne thought of Charlie Sloane; but, despite sundry
confidential talks, she did not know just what Anne thought of Gilbert
Blythe. To be sure, Anne herself did not know that.

"The boys may be boarding at the other end of Kingsport, for all I
know," Anne went on. "I am glad I'm going to Redmond, and I am sure I
shall like it after a while. But for the first few weeks I know I won't.
I shan't even have the comfort of looking forward to the weekend visit
home, as I had when I went to Queen's. Christmas will seem like a
thousand years away."

"Everything is changing--or going to change," said Diana sadly. "I have
a feeling that things will never be the same again, Anne."

"We have come to a parting of the ways, I suppose," said Anne
thoughtfully. "We had to come to it. Do you think, Diana, that being
grown-up is really as nice as we used to imagine it would be when we
were children?"

"I don't know--there are SOME nice things about it," answered Diana,
again caressing her ring with that little smile which always had the
effect of making Anne feel suddenly left out and inexperienced. "But
there are so many puzzling things, too. Sometimes I feel as if being
grown-up just frightened me--and then I would give anything to be a
little girl again."

"I suppose we'll get used to being grownup in time," said Anne
cheerfully. "There won't be so many unexpected things about it by and
by--though, after all, I fancy it's the unexpected things that give
spice to life. We're eighteen, Diana. In two more years we'll be twenty.
When I was ten I thought twenty was a green old age. In no time you'll
be a staid, middle-aged matron, and I shall be nice, old maid Aunt Anne,
coming to visit you on vacations. You'll always keep a corner for me,
won't you, Di darling? Not the spare room, of course--old maids can't
aspire to spare rooms, and I shall be as 'umble as Uriah Heep, and quite
content with a little over-the-porch or off-the-parlor cubby hole."

"What nonsense you do talk, Anne," laughed Diana. "You'll marry somebody
splendid and handsome and rich--and no spare room in Avonlea will be
half gorgeous enough for you--and you'll turn up your nose at all the
friends of your youth."

"That would be a pity; my nose is quite nice, but I fear turning it up
would spoil it," said Anne, patting that shapely organ. "I haven't so
many good features that I could afford to spoil those I have; so, even
if I should marry the King of the Cannibal Islands, I promise you I
won't turn up my nose at you, Diana."

With another gay laugh the girls separated, Diana to return to Orchard
Slope, Anne to walk to the Post Office. She found a letter awaiting her
there, and when Gilbert Blythe overtook her on the bridge over the Lake
of Shining Waters she was sparkling with the excitement of it.

"Priscilla Grant is going to Redmond, too," she exclaimed. "Isn't that
splendid? I hoped she would, but she didn't think her father would
consent. He has, however, and we're to board together. I feel that I can
face an army with banners--or all the professors of Redmond in one fell
phalanx--with a chum like Priscilla by my side."

"I think we'll like Kingsport," said Gilbert. "It's a nice old burg,
they tell me, and has the finest natural park in the world. I've heard
that the scenery in it is magnificent."

"I wonder if it will be--can be--any more beautiful than this," murmured
Anne, looking around her with the loving, enraptured eyes of those to
whom "home" must always be the loveliest spot in the world, no matter
what fairer lands may lie under alien stars.

They were leaning on the bridge of the old pond, drinking deep of the
enchantment of the dusk, just at the spot where Anne had climbed from
her sinking Dory on the day Elaine floated down to Camelot. The fine,
empurpling dye of sunset still stained the western skies, but the moon
was rising and the water lay like a great, silver dream in her light.
Remembrance wove a sweet and subtle spell over the two young creatures.

"You are very quiet, Anne," said Gilbert at last.

"I'm afraid to speak or move for fear all this wonderful beauty will
vanish just like a broken silence," breathed Anne.

Gilbert suddenly laid his hand over the slender white one lying on the
rail of the bridge. His hazel eyes deepened into darkness, his still
boyish lips opened to say something of the dream and hope that thrilled
his soul. But Anne snatched her hand away and turned quickly. The spell
of the dusk was broken for her.

"I must go home," she exclaimed, with a rather overdone carelessness.
"Marilla had a headache this afternoon, and I'm sure the twins will be
in some dreadful mischief by this time. I really shouldn't have stayed
away so long."

She chattered ceaselessly and inconsequently until they reached the
Green Gables lane. Poor Gilbert hardly had a chance to get a word in
edgewise. Anne felt rather relieved when they parted. There had been a
new, secret self-consciousness in her heart with regard to Gilbert, ever
since that fleeting moment of revelation in the garden of Echo
Lodge. Something alien had intruded into the old, perfect, school-day
comradeship--something that threatened to mar it.

"I never felt glad to see Gilbert go before," she thought,
half-resentfully, half-sorrowfully, as she walked alone up the lane.
"Our friendship will be spoiled if he goes on with this nonsense.
It mustn't be spoiled--I won't let it. Oh, WHY can't boys be just
sensible!"

Anne had an uneasy doubt that it was not strictly "sensible" that
she should still feel on her hand the warm pressure of Gilbert's, as
distinctly as she had felt it for the swift second his had rested
there; and still less sensible that the sensation was far from being an
unpleasant one--very different from that which had attended a similar
demonstration on Charlie Sloane's part, when she had been sitting out a
dance with him at a White Sands party three nights before. Anne shivered
over the disagreeable recollection. But all problems connected with
infatuated swains vanished from her mind when she entered the
homely, unsentimental atmosphere of the Green Gables kitchen where an
eight-year-old boy was crying grievously on the sofa.

"What is the matter, Davy?" asked Anne, taking him up in her arms.
"Where are Marilla and Dora?"

"Marilla's putting Dora to bed," sobbed Davy, "and I'm crying 'cause
Dora fell down the outside cellar steps, heels over head, and scraped
all the skin off her nose, and--"

"Oh, well, don't cry about it, dear. Of course, you are sorry for her,
but crying won't help her any. She'll be all right tomorrow. Crying
never helps any one, Davy-boy, and--"

"I ain't crying 'cause Dora fell down cellar," said Davy, cutting short
Anne's wellmeant preachment with increasing bitterness. "I'm crying,
cause I wasn't there to see her fall. I'm always missing some fun or
other, seems to me."

"Oh, Davy!" Anne choked back an unholy shriek of laughter. "Would you
call it fun to see poor little Dora fall down the steps and get hurt?"

"She wasn't MUCH hurt," said Davy, defiantly. "'Course, if she'd been
killed I'd have been real sorry, Anne. But the Keiths ain't so easy
killed. They're like the Blewetts, I guess. Herb Blewett fell off the
hayloft last Wednesday, and rolled right down through the turnip chute
into the box stall, where they had a fearful wild, cross horse, and
rolled right under his heels. And still he got out alive, with only
three bones broke. Mrs. Lynde says there are some folks you can't kill
with a meat-axe. Is Mrs. Lynde coming here tomorrow, Anne?"

"Yes, Davy, and I hope you'll be always very nice and good to her."

"I'll be nice and good. But will she ever put me to bed at nights,
Anne?"

"Perhaps. Why?"

"'Cause," said Davy very decidedly, "if she does I won't say my prayers
before her like I do before you, Anne."

"Why not?"

"'Cause I don't think it would be nice to talk to God before strangers,
Anne. Dora can say hers to Mrs. Lynde if she likes, but _I_ won't. I'll
wait till she's gone and then say 'em. Won't that be all right, Anne?"

"Yes, if you are sure you won't forget to say them, Davy-boy."

"Oh, I won't forget, you bet. I think saying my prayers is great fun.
But it won't be as good fun saying them alone as saying them to you.
I wish you'd stay home, Anne. I don't see what you want to go away and
leave us for."

"I don't exactly WANT to, Davy, but I feel I ought to go."

"If you don't want to go you needn't. You're grown up. When _I_'m grown
up I'm not going to do one single thing I don't want to do, Anne."

"All your life, Davy, you'll find yourself doing things you don't want
to do."

"I won't," said Davy flatly. "Catch me! I have to do things I don't want
to now 'cause you and Marilla'll send me to bed if I don't. But when I
grow up you can't do that, and there'll be nobody to tell me not to do
things. Won't I have the time! Say, Anne, Milty Boulter says his mother
says you're going to college to see if you can catch a man. Are you,
Anne? I want to know."

For a second Anne burned with resentment. Then she laughed, reminding
herself that Mrs. Boulter's crude vulgarity of thought and speech could
not harm her.

"No, Davy, I'm not. I'm going to study and grow and learn about many
things."

"What things?"

     "'Shoes and ships and sealing wax
     And cabbages and kings,'"

quoted Anne.

"But if you DID want to catch a man how would you go about it? I want
to know," persisted Davy, for whom the subject evidently possessed a
certain fascination.

"You'd better ask Mrs. Boulter," said Anne thoughtlessly. "I think it's
likely she knows more about the process than I do."

"I will, the next time I see her," said Davy gravely.

"Davy! If you do!" cried Anne, realizing her mistake.

"But you just told me to," protested Davy aggrieved.

"It's time you went to bed," decreed Anne, by way of getting out of the
scrape.

After Davy had gone to bed Anne wandered down to Victoria Island and sat
there alone, curtained with fine-spun, moonlit gloom, while the water
laughed around her in a duet of brook and wind. Anne had always loved
that brook. Many a dream had she spun over its sparkling water in
days gone by. She forgot lovelorn youths, and the cayenne speeches of
malicious neighbors, and all the problems of her girlish existence. In
imagination she sailed over storied seas that wash the distant shining
shores of "faery lands forlorn," where lost Atlantis and Elysium lie,
with the evening star for pilot, to the land of Heart's Desire. And she
was richer in those dreams than in realities; for things seen pass away,
but the things that are unseen are eternal.




Chapter II

Garlands of Autumn


The following week sped swiftly, crowded with innumerable "last things,"
as Anne called them. Good-bye calls had to be made and received, being
pleasant or otherwise, according to whether callers and called-upon
were heartily in sympathy with Anne's hopes, or thought she was too much
puffed-up over going to college and that it was their duty to "take her
down a peg or two."

The A.V.I.S. gave a farewell party in honor of Anne and Gilbert one
evening at the home of Josie Pye, choosing that place, partly because
Mr. Pye's house was large and convenient, partly because it was strongly
suspected that the Pye girls would have nothing to do with the affair if
their offer of the house for the party was not accepted. It was a very
pleasant little time, for the Pye girls were gracious, and said and did
nothing to mar the harmony of the occasion--which was not according
to their wont. Josie was unusually amiable--so much so that she even
remarked condescendingly to Anne,

"Your new dress is rather becoming to you, Anne. Really, you look ALMOST
PRETTY in it."

"How kind of you to say so," responded Anne, with dancing eyes. Her
sense of humor was developing, and the speeches that would have hurt her
at fourteen were becoming merely food for amusement now. Josie suspected
that Anne was laughing at her behind those wicked eyes; but she
contented herself with whispering to Gertie, as they went downstairs,
that Anne Shirley would put on more airs than ever now that she was
going to college--you'd see!

All the "old crowd" was there, full of mirth and zest and youthful
lightheartedness. Diana Barry, rosy and dimpled, shadowed by the
faithful Fred; Jane Andrews, neat and sensible and plain; Ruby Gillis,
looking her handsomest and brightest in a cream silk blouse, with red
geraniums in her golden hair; Gilbert Blythe and Charlie Sloane, both
trying to keep as near the elusive Anne as possible; Carrie Sloane,
looking pale and melancholy because, so it was reported, her father
would not allow Oliver Kimball to come near the place; Moody Spurgeon
MacPherson, whose round face and objectionable ears were as round and
objectionable as ever; and Billy Andrews, who sat in a corner all the
evening, chuckled when any one spoke to him, and watched Anne Shirley
with a grin of pleasure on his broad, freckled countenance.

Anne had known beforehand of the party, but she had not known that she
and Gilbert were, as the founders of the Society, to be presented with
a very complimentary "address" and "tokens of respect"--in her case a
volume of Shakespeare's plays, in Gilbert's a fountain pen. She was so
taken by surprise and pleased by the nice things said in the address,
read in Moody Spurgeon's most solemn and ministerial tones, that the
tears quite drowned the sparkle of her big gray eyes. She had worked
hard and faithfully for the A.V.I.S., and it warmed the cockles of her
heart that the members appreciated her efforts so sincerely. And they
were all so nice and friendly and jolly--even the Pye girls had their
merits; at that moment Anne loved all the world.

She enjoyed the evening tremendously, but the end of it rather spoiled
all. Gilbert again made the mistake of saying something sentimental
to her as they ate their supper on the moonlit verandah; and Anne, to
punish him, was gracious to Charlie Sloane and allowed the latter to
walk home with her. She found, however, that revenge hurts nobody quite
so much as the one who tries to inflict it. Gilbert walked airily off
with Ruby Gillis, and Anne could hear them laughing and talking gaily as
they loitered along in the still, crisp autumn air. They were evidently
having the best of good times, while she was horribly bored by Charlie
Sloane, who talked unbrokenly on, and never, even by accident, said one
thing that was worth listening to. Anne gave an occasional absent "yes"
or "no," and thought how beautiful Ruby had looked that night, how
very goggly Charlie's eyes were in the moonlight--worse even than by
daylight--and that the world, somehow, wasn't quite such a nice place as
she had believed it to be earlier in the evening.

"I'm just tired out--that is what is the matter with me," she said, when
she thankfully found herself alone in her own room. And she honestly
believed it was. But a certain little gush of joy, as from some secret,
unknown spring, bubbled up in her heart the next evening, when she saw
Gilbert striding down through the Haunted Wood and crossing the old log
bridge with that firm, quick step of his. So Gilbert was not going to
spend this last evening with Ruby Gillis after all!

"You look tired, Anne," he said.

"I am tired, and, worse than that, I'm disgruntled. I'm tired because
I've been packing my trunk and sewing all day. But I'm disgruntled
because six women have been here to say good-bye to me, and every one of
the six managed to say something that seemed to take the color right
out of life and leave it as gray and dismal and cheerless as a November
morning."

"Spiteful old cats!" was Gilbert's elegant comment.

"Oh, no, they weren't," said Anne seriously. "That is just the trouble.
If they had been spiteful cats I wouldn't have minded them. But they are
all nice, kind, motherly souls, who like me and whom I like, and that is
why what they said, or hinted, had such undue weight with me. They let
me see they thought I was crazy going to Redmond and trying to take
a B.A., and ever since I've been wondering if I am. Mrs. Peter Sloane
sighed and said she hoped my strength would hold out till I got through;
and at once I saw myself a hopeless victim of nervous prostration at the
end of my third year; Mrs. Eben Wright said it must cost an awful lot
to put in four years at Redmond; and I felt all over me that it was
unpardonable of me to squander Marilla's money and my own on such a
folly. Mrs. Jasper Bell said she hoped I wouldn't let college spoil me,
as it did some people; and I felt in my bones that the end of my four
Redmond years would see me a most insufferable creature, thinking I knew
it all, and looking down on everything and everybody in Avonlea; Mrs.
Elisha Wright said she understood that Redmond girls, especially those
who belonged to Kingsport, were 'dreadful dressy and stuck-up,' and she
guessed I wouldn't feel much at home among them; and I saw myself, a
snubbed, dowdy, humiliated country girl, shuffling through Redmond's
classic halls in coppertoned boots."

Anne ended with a laugh and a sigh commingled. With her sensitive nature
all disapproval had weight, even the disapproval of those for whose
opinions she had scant respect. For the time being life was savorless,
and ambition had gone out like a snuffed candle.

"You surely don't care for what they said," protested Gilbert. "You know
exactly how narrow their outlook on life is, excellent creatures though
they are. To do anything THEY have never done is anathema maranatha. You
are the first Avonlea girl who has ever gone to college; and you
know that all pioneers are considered to be afflicted with moonstruck
madness."

"Oh, I know. But FEELING is so different from KNOWING. My common sense
tells me all you can say, but there are times when common sense has
no power over me. Common nonsense takes possession of my soul. Really,
after Mrs. Elisha went away I hardly had the heart to finish packing."

"You're just tired, Anne. Come, forget it all and take a walk with
me--a ramble back through the woods beyond the marsh. There should be
something there I want to show you."

"Should be! Don't you know if it is there?"

"No. I only know it should be, from something I saw there in spring.
Come on. We'll pretend we are two children again and we'll go the way of
the wind."

They started gaily off. Anne, remembering the unpleasantness of the
preceding evening, was very nice to Gilbert; and Gilbert, who was
learning wisdom, took care to be nothing save the schoolboy comrade
again. Mrs. Lynde and Marilla watched them from the kitchen window.

"That'll be a match some day," Mrs. Lynde said approvingly.

Marilla winced slightly. In her heart she hoped it would, but it went
against her grain to hear the matter spoken of in Mrs. Lynde's gossipy
matter-of-fact way.

"They're only children yet," she said shortly.

Mrs. Lynde laughed good-naturedly.

"Anne is eighteen; I was married when I was that age. We old folks,
Marilla, are too much given to thinking children never grow up, that's
what. Anne is a young woman and Gilbert's a man, and he worships the
ground she walks on, as any one can see. He's a fine fellow, and Anne
can't do better. I hope she won't get any romantic nonsense into her
head at Redmond. I don't approve of them coeducational places and never
did, that's what. I don't believe," concluded Mrs. Lynde solemnly, "that
the students at such colleges ever do much else than flirt."

"They must study a little," said Marilla, with a smile.

"Precious little," sniffed Mrs. Rachel. "However, I think Anne will. She
never was flirtatious. But she doesn't appreciate Gilbert at his full
value, that's what. Oh, I know girls! Charlie Sloane is wild about her,
too, but I'd never advise her to marry a Sloane. The Sloanes are good,
honest, respectable people, of course. But when all's said and done,
they're SLOANES."

Marilla nodded. To an outsider, the statement that Sloanes were Sloanes
might not be very illuminating, but she understood. Every village has
such a family; good, honest, respectable people they may be, but SLOANES
they are and must ever remain, though they speak with the tongues of men
and angels.

Gilbert and Anne, happily unconscious that their future was thus being
settled by Mrs. Rachel, were sauntering through the shadows of the
Haunted Wood. Beyond, the harvest hills were basking in an amber sunset
radiance, under a pale, aerial sky of rose and blue. The distant spruce
groves were burnished bronze, and their long shadows barred the upland
meadows. But around them a little wind sang among the fir tassels, and
in it there was the note of autumn.

"This wood really is haunted now--by old memories," said Anne, stooping
to gather a spray of ferns, bleached to waxen whiteness by frost. "It
seems to me that the little girls Diana and I used to be play here
still, and sit by the Dryad's Bubble in the twilights, trysting with
the ghosts. Do you know, I can never go up this path in the dusk without
feeling a bit of the old fright and shiver? There was one especially
horrifying phantom which we created--the ghost of the murdered child
that crept up behind you and laid cold fingers on yours. I confess that,
to this day, I cannot help fancying its little, furtive footsteps behind
me when I come here after nightfall. I'm not afraid of the White Lady or
the headless man or the skeletons, but I wish I had never imagined that
baby's ghost into existence. How angry Marilla and Mrs. Barry were over
that affair," concluded Anne, with reminiscent laughter.

The woods around the head of the marsh were full of purple vistas,
threaded with gossamers. Past a dour plantation of gnarled spruces and
a maple-fringed, sun-warm valley they found the "something" Gilbert was
looking for.

"Ah, here it is," he said with satisfaction.

"An apple tree--and away back here!" exclaimed Anne delightedly.

"Yes, a veritable apple-bearing apple tree, too, here in the very midst
of pines and beeches, a mile away from any orchard. I was here one day
last spring and found it, all white with blossom. So I resolved I'd come
again in the fall and see if it had been apples. See, it's loaded. They
look good, too--tawny as russets but with a dusky red cheek. Most wild
seedlings are green and uninviting."

"I suppose it sprang years ago from some chance-sown seed," said Anne
dreamily. "And how it has grown and flourished and held its own here all
alone among aliens, the brave determined thing!"

"Here's a fallen tree with a cushion of moss. Sit down, Anne--it will
serve for a woodland throne. I'll climb for some apples. They all grow
high--the tree had to reach up to the sunlight."

The apples proved to be delicious. Under the tawny skin was a white,
white flesh, faintly veined with red; and, besides their own proper
apple taste, they had a certain wild, delightful tang no orchard-grown
apple ever possessed.

"The fatal apple of Eden couldn't have had a rarer flavor," commented
Anne. "But it's time we were going home. See, it was twilight three
minutes ago and now it's moonlight. What a pity we couldn't have caught
the moment of transformation. But such moments never are caught, I
suppose."

"Let's go back around the marsh and home by way of Lover's Lane. Do you
feel as disgruntled now as when you started out, Anne?"

"Not I. Those apples have been as manna to a hungry soul. I feel that I
shall love Redmond and have a splendid four years there."

"And after those four years--what?"

"Oh, there's another bend in the road at their end," answered Anne
lightly. "I've no idea what may be around it--I don't want to have. It's
nicer not to know."

Lover's Lane was a dear place that night, still and mysteriously dim
in the pale radiance of the moonlight. They loitered through it in a
pleasant chummy silence, neither caring to talk.

"If Gilbert were always as he has been this evening how nice and simple
everything would be," reflected Anne.

Gilbert was looking at Anne, as she walked along. In her light dress,
with her slender delicacy, she made him think of a white iris.

"I wonder if I can ever make her care for me," he thought, with a pang
of self-distrust.




Chapter III

Greeting and Farewell


Charlie Sloane, Gilbert Blythe and Anne Shirley left Avonlea the
following Monday morning. Anne had hoped for a fine day. Diana was to
drive her to the station and they wanted this, their last drive together
for some time, to be a pleasant one. But when Anne went to bed Sunday
night the east wind was moaning around Green Gables with an ominous
prophecy which was fulfilled in the morning. Anne awoke to find
raindrops pattering against her window and shadowing the pond's gray
surface with widening rings; hills and sea were hidden in mist, and the
whole world seemed dim and dreary. Anne dressed in the cheerless gray
dawn, for an early start was necessary to catch the boat train; she
struggled against the tears that WOULD well up in her eyes in spite of
herself. She was leaving the home that was so dear to her, and something
told her that she was leaving it forever, save as a holiday refuge.
Things would never be the same again; coming back for vacations would
not be living there. And oh, how dear and beloved everything was--that
little white porch room, sacred to the dreams of girlhood, the old Snow
Queen at the window, the brook in the hollow, the Dryad's Bubble, the
Haunted Woods, and Lover's Lane--all the thousand and one dear spots
where memories of the old years bided. Could she ever be really happy
anywhere else?

Breakfast at Green Gables that morning was a rather doleful meal. Davy,
for the first time in his life probably, could not eat, but blubbered
shamelessly over his porridge. Nobody else seemed to have much appetite,
save Dora, who tucked away her rations comfortably. Dora, like the
immortal and most prudent Charlotte, who "went on cutting bread and
butter" when her frenzied lover's body had been carried past on a
shutter, was one of those fortunate creatures who are seldom disturbed
by anything. Even at eight it took a great deal to ruffle Dora's
placidity. She was sorry Anne was going away, of course, but was that
any reason why she should fail to appreciate a poached egg on toast? Not
at all. And, seeing that Davy could not eat his, Dora ate it for him.

Promptly on time Diana appeared with horse and buggy, her rosy face
glowing above her raincoat. The good-byes had to be said then somehow.
Mrs. Lynde came in from her quarters to give Anne a hearty embrace and
warn her to be careful of her health, whatever she did. Marilla, brusque
and tearless, pecked Anne's cheek and said she supposed they'd hear from
her when she got settled. A casual observer might have concluded that
Anne's going mattered very little to her--unless said observer had
happened to get a good look in her eyes. Dora kissed Anne primly and
squeezed out two decorous little tears; but Davy, who had been crying on
the back porch step ever since they rose from the table, refused to say
good-bye at all. When he saw Anne coming towards him he sprang to his
feet, bolted up the back stairs, and hid in a clothes closet, out of
which he would not come. His muffled howls were the last sounds Anne
heard as she left Green Gables.

It rained heavily all the way to Bright River, to which station they had
to go, since the branch line train from Carmody did not connect with the
boat train. Charlie and Gilbert were on the station platform when they
reached it, and the train was whistling. Anne had just time to get her
ticket and trunk check, say a hurried farewell to Diana, and hasten on
board. She wished she were going back with Diana to Avonlea; she knew
she was going to die of homesickness. And oh, if only that dismal rain
would stop pouring down as if the whole world were weeping over summer
vanished and joys departed! Even Gilbert's presence brought her no
comfort, for Charlie Sloane was there, too, and Sloanishness could be
tolerated only in fine weather. It was absolutely insufferable in rain.

But when the boat steamed out of Charlottetown harbor things took a turn
for the better. The rain ceased and the sun began to burst out goldenly
now and again between the rents in the clouds, burnishing the gray seas
with copper-hued radiance, and lighting up the mists that curtained the
Island's red shores with gleams of gold foretokening a fine day after
all. Besides, Charlie Sloane promptly became so seasick that he had to
go below, and Anne and Gilbert were left alone on deck.

"I am very glad that all the Sloanes get seasick as soon as they go on
water," thought Anne mercilessly. "I am sure I couldn't take my farewell
look at the 'ould sod' with Charlie standing there pretending to look
sentimentally at it, too."

"Well, we're off," remarked Gilbert unsentimentally.

"Yes, I feel like Byron's 'Childe Harold'--only it isn't really my
'native shore' that I'm watching," said Anne, winking her gray eyes
vigorously. "Nova Scotia is that, I suppose. But one's native shore is
the land one loves the best, and that's good old P.E.I. for me. I can't
believe I didn't always live here. Those eleven years before I came seem
like a bad dream. It's seven years since I crossed on this boat--the
evening Mrs. Spencer brought me over from Hopetown. I can see myself, in
that dreadful old wincey dress and faded sailor hat, exploring decks and
cabins with enraptured curiosity. It was a fine evening; and how those
red Island shores did gleam in the sunshine. Now I'm crossing the strait
again. Oh, Gilbert, I do hope I'll like Redmond and Kingsport, but I'm
sure I won't!"

"Where's all your philosophy gone, Anne?"

"It's all submerged under a great, swamping wave of loneliness and
homesickness. I've longed for three years to go to Redmond--and now
I'm going--and I wish I weren't! Never mind! I shall be cheerful and
philosophical again after I have just one good cry. I MUST have that,
'as a went'--and I'll have to wait until I get into my boardinghouse
bed tonight, wherever it may be, before I can have it. Then Anne will be
herself again. I wonder if Davy has come out of the closet yet."

It was nine that night when their train reached Kingsport, and they
found themselves in the blue-white glare of the crowded station. Anne
felt horribly bewildered, but a moment later she was seized by Priscilla
Grant, who had come to Kingsport on Saturday.

"Here you are, beloved! And I suppose you're as tired as I was when I
got here Saturday night."

"Tired! Priscilla, don't talk of it. I'm tired, and green, and
provincial, and only about ten years old. For pity's sake take your
poor, broken-down chum to some place where she can hear herself think."

"I'll take you right up to our boardinghouse. I've a cab ready outside."

"It's such a blessing you're here, Prissy. If you weren't I think I
should just sit down on my suitcase, here and now, and weep bitter
tears. What a comfort one familiar face is in a howling wilderness of
strangers!"

"Is that Gilbert Blythe over there, Anne? How he has grown up this past
year! He was only a schoolboy when I taught in Carmody. And of course
that's Charlie Sloane. HE hasn't changed--couldn't! He looked just like
that when he was born, and he'll look like that when he's eighty. This
way, dear. We'll be home in twenty minutes."

"Home!" groaned Anne. "You mean we'll be in some horrible boardinghouse,
in a still more horrible hall bedroom, looking out on a dingy back
yard."

"It isn't a horrible boardinghouse, Anne-girl. Here's our cab. Hop
in--the driver will get your trunk. Oh, yes, the boardinghouse--it's
really a very nice place of its kind, as you'll admit tomorrow morning
when a good night's sleep has turned your blues rosy pink. It's a big,
old-fashioned, gray stone house on St. John Street, just a nice little
constitutional from Redmond. It used to be the 'residence' of great
folk, but fashion has deserted St. John Street and its houses only dream
now of better days. They're so big that people living in them have
to take boarders just to fill up. At least, that is the reason our
landladies are very anxious to impress on us. They're delicious,
Anne--our landladies, I mean."

"How many are there?"

"Two. Miss Hannah Harvey and Miss Ada Harvey. They were born twins about
fifty years ago."

"I can't get away from twins, it seems," smiled Anne. "Wherever I go
they confront me."

"Oh, they're not twins now, dear. After they reached the age of
thirty they never were twins again. Miss Hannah has grown old, not too
gracefully, and Miss Ada has stayed thirty, less gracefully still. I
don't know whether Miss Hannah can smile or not; I've never caught
her at it so far, but Miss Ada smiles all the time and that's worse.
However, they're nice, kind souls, and they take two boarders every
year because Miss Hannah's economical soul cannot bear to 'waste room
space'--not because they need to or have to, as Miss Ada has told me
seven times since Saturday night. As for our rooms, I admit they are
hall bedrooms, and mine does look out on the back yard. Your room is
a front one and looks out on Old St. John's graveyard, which is just
across the street."

"That sounds gruesome," shivered Anne. "I think I'd rather have the back
yard view."

"Oh, no, you wouldn't. Wait and see. Old St. John's is a darling place.
It's been a graveyard so long that it's ceased to be one and has become
one of the sights of Kingsport. I was all through it yesterday for a
pleasure exertion. There's a big stone wall and a row of enormous trees
all around it, and rows of trees all through it, and the queerest old
tombstones, with the queerest and quaintest inscriptions. You'll go
there to study, Anne, see if you don't. Of course, nobody is ever buried
there now. But a few years ago they put up a beautiful monument to the
memory of Nova Scotian soldiers who fell in the Crimean War. It is just
opposite the entrance gates and there's 'scope for imagination' in it,
as you used to say. Here's your trunk at last--and the boys coming to
say good night. Must I really shake hands with Charlie Sloane, Anne?
His hands are always so cold and fishy-feeling. We must ask them to call
occasionally. Miss Hannah gravely told me we could have 'young gentlemen
callers' two evenings in the week, if they went away at a reasonable
hour; and Miss Ada asked me, smiling, please to be sure they didn't sit
on her beautiful cushions. I promised to see to it; but goodness knows
where else they CAN sit, unless they sit on the floor, for there are
cushions on EVERYTHING. Miss Ada even has an elaborate Battenburg one on
top of the piano."

Anne was laughing by this time. Priscilla's gay chatter had the intended
effect of cheering her up; homesickness vanished for the time being, and
did not even return in full force when she finally found herself alone
in her little bedroom. She went to her window and looked out. The street
below was dim and quiet. Across it the moon was shining above the trees
in Old St. John's, just behind the great dark head of the lion on the
monument. Anne wondered if it could have been only that morning that she
had left Green Gables. She had the sense of a long passage of time which
one day of change and travel gives.

"I suppose that very moon is looking down on Green Gables now," she
mused. "But I won't think about it--that way homesickness lies. I'm not
even going to have my good cry. I'll put that off to a more convenient
season, and just now I'll go calmly and sensibly to bed and to sleep."




Chapter IV

April's Lady


Kingsport is a quaint old town, hearking back to early Colonial days,
and wrapped in its ancient atmosphere, as some fine old dame in garments
fashioned like those of her youth. Here and there it sprouts out into
modernity, but at heart it is still unspoiled; it is full of curious
relics, and haloed by the romance of many legends of the past. Once it
was a mere frontier station on the fringe of the wilderness, and those
were the days when Indians kept life from being monotonous to the
settlers. Then it grew to be a bone of contention between the British
and the French, being occupied now by the one and now by the other,
emerging from each occupation with some fresh scar of battling nations
branded on it.

It has in its park a martello tower, autographed all over by tourists,
a dismantled old French fort on the hills beyond the town, and several
antiquated cannon in its public squares. It has other historic spots
also, which may be hunted out by the curious, and none is more quaint
and delightful than Old St. John's Cemetery at the very core of the
town, with streets of quiet, old-time houses on two sides, and busy,
bustling, modern thoroughfares on the others. Every citizen of Kingsport
feels a thrill of possessive pride in Old St. John's, for, if he be of
any pretensions at all, he has an ancestor buried there, with a queer,
crooked slab at his head, or else sprawling protectively over the grave,
on which all the main facts of his history are recorded. For the most
part no great art or skill was lavished on those old tombstones. The
larger number are of roughly chiselled brown or gray native stone, and
only in a few cases is there any attempt at ornamentation. Some are
adorned with skull and cross-bones, and this grizzly decoration is
frequently coupled with a cherub's head. Many are prostrate and in
ruins. Into almost all Time's tooth has been gnawing, until some
inscriptions have been completely effaced, and others can only be
deciphered with difficulty. The graveyard is very full and very bowery,
for it is surrounded and intersected by rows of elms and willows,
beneath whose shade the sleepers must lie very dreamlessly, forever
crooned to by the winds and leaves over them, and quite undisturbed by
the clamor of traffic just beyond.

Anne took the first of many rambles in Old St. John's the next
afternoon. She and Priscilla had gone to Redmond in the forenoon and
registered as students, after which there was nothing more to do that
day. The girls gladly made their escape, for it was not exhilarating to
be surrounded by crowds of strangers, most of whom had a rather alien
appearance, as if not quite sure where they belonged.

The "freshettes" stood about in detached groups of two or three,
looking askance at each other; the "freshies," wiser in their day and
generation, had banded themselves together on the big staircase of the
entrance hall, where they were shouting out glees with all the vigor of
youthful lungs, as a species of defiance to their traditional enemies,
the Sophomores, a few of whom were prowling loftily about, looking
properly disdainful of the "unlicked cubs" on the stairs. Gilbert and
Charlie were nowhere to be seen.

"Little did I think the day would ever come when I'd be glad of the
sight of a Sloane," said Priscilla, as they crossed the campus, "but I'd
welcome Charlie's goggle eyes almost ecstatically. At least, they'd be
familiar eyes."

"Oh," sighed Anne. "I can't describe how I felt when I was standing
there, waiting my turn to be registered--as insignificant as the
teeniest drop in a most enormous bucket. It's bad enough to feel
insignificant, but it's unbearable to have it grained into your soul
that you will never, can never, be anything but insignificant, and that
is how I did feel--as if I were invisible to the naked eye and some of
those Sophs might step on me. I knew I would go down to my grave unwept,
unhonored and unsung."

"Wait till next year," comforted Priscilla. "Then we'll be able to look
as bored and sophisticated as any Sophomore of them all. No doubt it is
rather dreadful to feel insignificant; but I think it's better than
to feel as big and awkward as I did--as if I were sprawled all over
Redmond. That's how I felt--I suppose because I was a good two inches
taller than any one else in the crowd. I wasn't afraid a Soph might walk
over me; I was afraid they'd take me for an elephant, or an overgrown
sample of a potato-fed Islander."

"I suppose the trouble is we can't forgive big Redmond for not being
little Queen's," said Anne, gathering about her the shreds of her old
cheerful philosophy to cover her nakedness of spirit. "When we left
Queen's we knew everybody and had a place of our own. I suppose we have
been unconsciously expecting to take life up at Redmond just where we
left off at Queen's, and now we feel as if the ground had slipped from
under our feet. I'm thankful that neither Mrs. Lynde nor Mrs. Elisha
Wright know, or ever will know, my state of mind at present. They would
exult in saying 'I told you so,' and be convinced it was the beginning
of the end. Whereas it is just the end of the beginning."

"Exactly. That sounds more Anneish. In a little while we'll be
acclimated and acquainted, and all will be well. Anne, did you notice
the girl who stood alone just outside the door of the coeds' dressing
room all the morning--the pretty one with the brown eyes and crooked
mouth?"

"Yes, I did. I noticed her particularly because she seemed the only
creature there who LOOKED as lonely and friendless as I FELT. I had YOU,
but she had no one."

"I think she felt pretty all-by-herselfish, too. Several times I saw her
make a motion as if to cross over to us, but she never did it--too shy,
I suppose. I wished she would come. If I hadn't felt so much like the
aforesaid elephant I'd have gone to her. But I couldn't lumber across
that big hall with all those boys howling on the stairs. She was the
prettiest freshette I saw today, but probably favor is deceitful and
even beauty is vain on your first day at Redmond," concluded Priscilla
with a laugh.

"I'm going across to Old St. John's after lunch," said Anne. "I don't
know that a graveyard is a very good place to go to get cheered up, but
it seems the only get-at-able place where there are trees, and trees
I must have. I'll sit on one of those old slabs and shut my eyes and
imagine I'm in the Avonlea woods."

Anne did not do that, however, for she found enough of interest in Old
St. John's to keep her eyes wide open. They went in by the entrance
gates, past the simple, massive, stone arch surmounted by the great lion
of England.

     "'And on Inkerman yet the wild bramble is gory,
     And those bleak heights henceforth shall be famous in story,'"

quoted Anne, looking at it with a thrill. They found themselves in a
dim, cool, green place where winds were fond of purring. Up and down
the long grassy aisles they wandered, reading the quaint, voluminous
epitaphs, carved in an age that had more leisure than our own.

"'Here lieth the body of Albert Crawford, Esq.,'" read Anne from a
worn, gray slab, "'for many years Keeper of His Majesty's Ordnance at
Kingsport. He served in the army till the peace of 1763, when he retired
from bad health. He was a brave officer, the best of husbands, the best
of fathers, the best of friends. He died October 29th, 1792, aged 84
years.' There's an epitaph for you, Prissy. There is certainly some
'scope for imagination' in it. How full such a life must have been of
adventure! And as for his personal qualities, I'm sure human eulogy
couldn't go further. I wonder if they told him he was all those best
things while he was alive."

"Here's another," said Priscilla. "Listen--

'To the memory of Alexander Ross, who died on the 22nd of September,
1840, aged 43 years. This is raised as a tribute of affection by one
whom he served so faithfully for 27 years that he was regarded as a
friend, deserving the fullest confidence and attachment.'"

"A very good epitaph," commented Anne thoughtfully. "I wouldn't wish a
better. We are all servants of some sort, and if the fact that we are
faithful can be truthfully inscribed on our tombstones nothing more need
be added. Here's a sorrowful little gray stone, Prissy--'to the memory
of a favorite child.' And here is another 'erected to the memory of one
who is buried elsewhere.' I wonder where that unknown grave is. Really,
Pris, the graveyards of today will never be as interesting as this. You
were right--I shall come here often. I love it already. I see we're not
alone here--there's a girl down at the end of this avenue."

"Yes, and I believe it's the very girl we saw at Redmond this morning.
I've been watching her for five minutes. She has started to come up the
avenue exactly half a dozen times, and half a dozen times has she turned
and gone back. Either she's dreadfully shy or she has got something on
her conscience. Let's go and meet her. It's easier to get acquainted in
a graveyard than at Redmond, I believe."

They walked down the long grassy arcade towards the stranger, who was
sitting on a gray slab under an enormous willow. She was certainly very
pretty, with a vivid, irregular, bewitching type of prettiness. There
was a gloss as of brown nuts on her satin-smooth hair and a soft, ripe
glow on her round cheeks. Her eyes were big and brown and velvety, under
oddly-pointed black brows, and her crooked mouth was rose-red. She
wore a smart brown suit, with two very modish little shoes peeping from
beneath it; and her hat of dull pink straw, wreathed with golden-brown
poppies, had the indefinable, unmistakable air which pertains to the
"creation" of an artist in millinery. Priscilla had a sudden stinging
consciousness that her own hat had been trimmed by her village store
milliner, and Anne wondered uncomfortably if the blouse she had made
herself, and which Mrs. Lynde had fitted, looked VERY countrified and
home-made besides the stranger's smart attire. For a moment both girls
felt like turning back.

But they had already stopped and turned towards the gray slab. It was
too late to retreat, for the brown-eyed girl had evidently concluded
that they were coming to speak to her. Instantly she sprang up and came
forward with outstretched hand and a gay, friendly smile in which there
seemed not a shadow of either shyness or burdened conscience.

"Oh, I want to know who you two girls are," she exclaimed eagerly. "I've
been DYING to know. I saw you at Redmond this morning. Say, wasn't it
AWFUL there? For the time I wished I had stayed home and got married."

Anne and Priscilla both broke into unconstrained laughter at this
unexpected conclusion. The brown-eyed girl laughed, too.

"I really did. I COULD have, you know. Come, let's all sit down on this
gravestone and get acquainted. It won't be hard. I know we're going
to adore each other--I knew it as soon as I saw you at Redmond this
morning. I wanted so much to go right over and hug you both."

"Why didn't you?" asked Priscilla.

"Because I simply couldn't make up my mind to do it. I never can make
up my mind about anything myself--I'm always afflicted with indecision.
Just as soon as I decide to do something I feel in my bones that another
course would be the correct one. It's a dreadful misfortune, but I was
born that way, and there is no use in blaming me for it, as some people
do. So I couldn't make up my mind to go and speak to you, much as I
wanted to."

"We thought you were too shy," said Anne.

"No, no, dear. Shyness isn't among the many failings--or virtues--of
Philippa Gordon--Phil for short. Do call me Phil right off. Now, what
are your handles?"

"She's Priscilla Grant," said Anne, pointing.

"And SHE'S Anne Shirley," said Priscilla, pointing in turn.

"And we're from the Island," said both together.

"I hail from Bolingbroke, Nova Scotia," said Philippa.

"Bolingbroke!" exclaimed Anne. "Why, that is where I was born."

"Do you really mean it? Why, that makes you a Bluenose after all."

"No, it doesn't," retorted Anne. "Wasn't it Dan O'Connell who said that
if a man was born in a stable it didn't make him a horse? I'm Island to
the core."

"Well, I'm glad you were born in Bolingbroke anyway. It makes us kind of
neighbors, doesn't it? And I like that, because when I tell you secrets
it won't be as if I were telling them to a stranger. I have to tell
them. I can't keep secrets--it's no use to try. That's my worst
failing--that, and indecision, as aforesaid. Would you believe it?--it
took me half an hour to decide which hat to wear when I was coming
here--HERE, to a graveyard! At first I inclined to my brown one with
the feather; but as soon as I put it on I thought this pink one with
the floppy brim would be more becoming. When I got IT pinned in place
I liked the brown one better. At last I put them close together on the
bed, shut my eyes, and jabbed with a hat pin. The pin speared the pink
one, so I put it on. It is becoming, isn't it? Tell me, what do you
think of my looks?"

At this naive demand, made in a perfectly serious tone, Priscilla
laughed again. But Anne said, impulsively squeezing Philippa's hand,

"We thought this morning that you were the prettiest girl we saw at
Redmond."

Philippa's crooked mouth flashed into a bewitching, crooked smile over
very white little teeth.

"I thought that myself," was her next astounding statement, "but I
wanted some one else's opinion to bolster mine up. I can't decide even
on my own appearance. Just as soon as I've decided that I'm pretty
I begin to feel miserably that I'm not. Besides, have a horrible old
great-aunt who is always saying to me, with a mournful sigh, 'You were
such a pretty baby. It's strange how children change when they grow up.'
I adore aunts, but I detest great-aunts. Please tell me quite often that
I am pretty, if you don't mind. I feel so much more comfortable when I
can believe I'm pretty. And I'll be just as obliging to you if you want
me to--I CAN be, with a clear conscience."

"Thanks," laughed Anne, "but Priscilla and I are so firmly convinced of
our own good looks that we don't need any assurance about them, so you
needn't trouble."

"Oh, you're laughing at me. I know you think I'm abominably vain, but
I'm not. There really isn't one spark of vanity in me. And I'm never a
bit grudging about paying compliments to other girls when they deserve
them. I'm so glad I know you folks. I came up on Saturday and I've
nearly died of homesickness ever since. It's a horrible feeling, isn't
it? In Bolingbroke I'm an important personage, and in Kingsport I'm just
nobody! There were times when I could feel my soul turning a delicate
blue. Where do you hang out?"

"Thirty-eight St. John's Street."

"Better and better. Why, I'm just around the corner on Wallace Street.
I don't like my boardinghouse, though. It's bleak and lonesome, and my
room looks out on such an unholy back yard. It's the ugliest place
in the world. As for cats--well, surely ALL the Kingsport cats can't
congregate there at night, but half of them must. I adore cats on hearth
rugs, snoozing before nice, friendly fires, but cats in back yards at
midnight are totally different animals. The first night I was here I
cried all night, and so did the cats. You should have seen my nose in
the morning. How I wished I had never left home!"

"I don't know how you managed to make up your mind to come to Redmond at
all, if you are really such an undecided person," said amused Priscilla.

"Bless your heart, honey, I didn't. It was father who wanted me to come
here. His heart was set on it--why, I don't know. It seems perfectly
ridiculous to think of me studying for a B.A. degree, doesn't it? Not
but what I can do it, all right. I have heaps of brains."

"Oh!" said Priscilla vaguely.

"Yes. But it's such hard work to use them. And B.A.'s are such learned,
dignified, wise, solemn creatures--they must be. No, _I_ didn't want
to come to Redmond. I did it just to oblige father. He IS such a duck.
Besides, I knew if I stayed home I'd have to get married. Mother wanted
that--wanted it decidedly. Mother has plenty of decision. But I really
hated the thought of being married for a few years yet. I want to have
heaps of fun before I settle down. And, ridiculous as the idea of my
being a B.A. is, the idea of my being an old married woman is still more
absurd, isn't it? I'm only eighteen. No, I concluded I would rather come
to Redmond than be married. Besides, how could I ever have made up my
mind which man to marry?"

"Were there so many?" laughed Anne.

"Heaps. The boys like me awfully--they really do. But there were only
two that mattered. The rest were all too young and too poor. I must
marry a rich man, you know."

"Why must you?"

"Honey, you couldn't imagine ME being a poor man's wife, could you? I
can't do a single useful thing, and I am VERY extravagant. Oh, no, my
husband must have heaps of money. So that narrowed them down to two.
But I couldn't decide between two any easier than between two hundred.
I knew perfectly well that whichever one I chose I'd regret all my life
that I hadn't married the other."

"Didn't you--love--either of them?" asked Anne, a little hesitatingly.
It was not easy for her to speak to a stranger of the great mystery and
transformation of life.

"Goodness, no. _I_ couldn't love anybody. It isn't in me. Besides I
wouldn't want to. Being in love makes you a perfect slave, _I_ think.
And it would give a man such power to hurt you. I'd be afraid. No, no,
Alec and Alonzo are two dear boys, and I like them both so much that I
really don't know which I like the better. That is the trouble. Alec
is the best looking, of course, and I simply couldn't marry a man who
wasn't handsome. He is good-tempered too, and has lovely, curly, black
hair. He's rather too perfect--I don't believe I'd like a perfect
husband--somebody I could never find fault with."

"Then why not marry Alonzo?" asked Priscilla gravely.

"Think of marrying a name like Alonzo!" said Phil dolefully. "I don't
believe I could endure it. But he has a classic nose, and it WOULD be a
comfort to have a nose in the family that could be depended on. I can't
depend on mine. So far, it takes after the Gordon pattern, but I'm so
afraid it will develop Byrne tendencies as I grow older. I examine it
every day anxiously to make sure it's still Gordon. Mother was a Byrne
and has the Byrne nose in the Byrnest degree. Wait till you see it. I
adore nice noses. Your nose is awfully nice, Anne Shirley. Alonzo's
nose nearly turned the balance in his favor. But ALONZO! No, I couldn't
decide. If I could have done as I did with the hats--stood them both
up together, shut my eyes, and jabbed with a hatpin--it would have been
quite easy."

"What did Alec and Alonzo feel like when you came away?" queried
Priscilla.

"Oh, they still have hope. I told them they'd have to wait till I could
make up my mind. They're quite willing to wait. They both worship me,
you know. Meanwhile, I intend to have a good time. I expect I shall have
heaps of beaux at Redmond. I can't be happy unless I have, you know. But
don't you think the freshmen are fearfully homely? I saw only one really
handsome fellow among them. He went away before you came. I heard his
chum call him Gilbert. His chum had eyes that stuck out THAT FAR. But
you're not going yet, girls? Don't go yet."

"I think we must," said Anne, rather coldly. "It's getting late, and
I've some work to do."

"But you'll both come to see me, won't you?" asked Philippa, getting up
and putting an arm around each. "And let me come to see you. I want to
be chummy with you. I've taken such a fancy to you both. And I haven't
quite disgusted you with my frivolity, have I?"

"Not quite," laughed Anne, responding to Phil's squeeze, with a return
of cordiality.

"Because I'm not half so silly as I seem on the surface, you know. You
just accept Philippa Gordon, as the Lord made her, with all her faults,
and I believe you'll come to like her. Isn't this graveyard a sweet
place? I'd love to be buried here. Here's a grave I didn't see
before--this one in the iron railing--oh, girls, look, see--the stone
says it's the grave of a middy who was killed in the fight between the
Shannon and the Chesapeake. Just fancy!"

Anne paused by the railing and looked at the worn stone, her pulses
thrilling with sudden excitement. The old graveyard, with its
over-arching trees and long aisles of shadows, faded from her sight.
Instead, she saw the Kingsport Harbor of nearly a century agone. Out of
the mist came slowly a great frigate, brilliant with "the meteor flag of
England." Behind her was another, with a still, heroic form, wrapped in
his own starry flag, lying on the quarter deck--the gallant Lawrence.
Time's finger had turned back his pages, and that was the Shannon
sailing triumphant up the bay with the Chesapeake as her prize.

"Come back, Anne Shirley--come back," laughed Philippa, pulling her arm.
"You're a hundred years away from us. Come back."

Anne came back with a sigh; her eyes were shining softly.

"I've always loved that old story," she said, "and although the
English won that victory, I think it was because of the brave, defeated
commander I love it. This grave seems to bring it so near and make it
so real. This poor little middy was only eighteen. He 'died of desperate
wounds received in gallant action'--so reads his epitaph. It is such as
a soldier might wish for."

Before she turned away, Anne unpinned the little cluster of purple
pansies she wore and dropped it softly on the grave of the boy who had
perished in the great sea-duel.

"Well, what do you think of our new friend?" asked Priscilla, when Phil
had left them.

"I like her. There is something very lovable about her, in spite of all
her nonsense. I believe, as she says herself, that she isn't half as
silly as she sounds. She's a dear, kissable baby--and I don't know that
she'll ever really grow up."

"I like her, too," said Priscilla, decidedly. "She talks as much about
boys as Ruby Gillis does. But it always enrages or sickens me to hear
Ruby, whereas I just wanted to laugh good-naturedly at Phil. Now, what
is the why of that?"

"There is a difference," said Anne meditatively. "I think it's because
Ruby is really so CONSCIOUS of boys. She plays at love and love-making.
Besides, you feel, when she is boasting of her beaux that she is doing
it to rub it well into you that you haven't half so many. Now, when Phil
talks of her beaux it sounds as if she was just speaking of chums. She
really looks upon boys as good comrades, and she is pleased when she has
dozens of them tagging round, simply because she likes to be popular and
to be thought popular. Even Alex and Alonzo--I'll never be able to
think of those two names separately after this--are to her just two
playfellows who want her to play with them all their lives. I'm glad
we met her, and I'm glad we went to Old St. John's. I believe I've put
forth a tiny soul-root into Kingsport soil this afternoon. I hope so. I
hate to feel transplanted."




Chapter V

Letters from Home


For the next three weeks Anne and Priscilla continued to feel as
strangers in a strange land. Then, suddenly, everything seemed to fall
into focus--Redmond, professors, classes, students, studies, social
doings. Life became homogeneous again, instead of being made up of
detached fragments. The Freshmen, instead of being a collection of
unrelated individuals, found themselves a class, with a class spirit, a
class yell, class interests, class antipathies and class ambitions.
They won the day in the annual "Arts Rush" against the Sophomores,
and thereby gained the respect of all the classes, and an enormous,
confidence-giving opinion of themselves. For three years the Sophomores
had won in the "rush"; that the victory of this year perched upon the
Freshmen's banner was attributed to the strategic generalship of Gilbert
Blythe, who marshalled the campaign and originated certain new tactics,
which demoralized the Sophs and swept the Freshmen to triumph. As
a reward of merit he was elected president of the Freshman Class, a
position of honor and responsibility--from a Fresh point of view,
at least--coveted by many. He was also invited to join the
"Lambs"--Redmondese for Lamba Theta--a compliment rarely paid to a
Freshman. As a preparatory initiation ordeal he had to parade the
principal business streets of Kingsport for a whole day wearing a
sunbonnet and a voluminous kitchen apron of gaudily flowered calico.
This he did cheerfully, doffing his sunbonnet with courtly grace when he
met ladies of his acquaintance. Charlie Sloane, who had not been asked
to join the Lambs, told Anne he did not see how Blythe could do it, and
HE, for his part, could never humiliate himself so.

"Fancy Charlie Sloane in a 'caliker' apron and a 'sunbunnit,'" giggled
Priscilla. "He'd look exactly like his old Grandmother Sloane.
Gilbert, now, looked as much like a man in them as in his own proper
habiliments."

Anne and Priscilla found themselves in the thick of the social life of
Redmond. That this came about so speedily was due in great measure to
Philippa Gordon. Philippa was the daughter of a rich and well-known man,
and belonged to an old and exclusive "Bluenose" family. This, combined
with her beauty and charm--a charm acknowledged by all who met
her--promptly opened the gates of all cliques, clubs and classes in
Redmond to her; and where she went Anne and Priscilla went, too. Phil
"adored" Anne and Priscilla, especially Anne. She was a loyal little
soul, crystal-free from any form of snobbishness. "Love me, love my
friends" seemed to be her unconscious motto. Without effort, she took
them with her into her ever widening circle of acquaintanceship, and the
two Avonlea girls found their social pathway at Redmond made very
easy and pleasant for them, to the envy and wonderment of the other
freshettes, who, lacking Philippa's sponsorship, were doomed to remain
rather on the fringe of things during their first college year.

To Anne and Priscilla, with their more serious views of life, Phil
remained the amusing, lovable baby she had seemed on their first
meeting. Yet, as she said herself, she had "heaps" of brains. When or
where she found time to study was a mystery, for she seemed always in
demand for some kind of "fun," and her home evenings were crowded
with callers. She had all the "beaux" that heart could desire, for
nine-tenths of the Freshmen and a big fraction of all the other classes
were rivals for her smiles. She was naively delighted over this, and
gleefully recounted each new conquest to Anne and Priscilla, with
comments that might have made the unlucky lover's ears burn fiercely.

"Alec and Alonzo don't seem to have any serious rival yet," remarked
Anne, teasingly.

"Not one," agreed Philippa. "I write them both every week and tell
them all about my young men here. I'm sure it must amuse them. But, of
course, the one I like best I can't get. Gilbert Blythe won't take any
notice of me, except to look at me as if I were a nice little kitten
he'd like to pat. Too well I know the reason. I owe you a grudge, Queen
Anne. I really ought to hate you and instead I love you madly, and I'm
miserable if I don't see you every day. You're different from any girl
I ever knew before. When you look at me in a certain way I feel what an
insignificant, frivolous little beast I am, and I long to be better
and wiser and stronger. And then I make good resolutions; but the first
nice-looking mannie who comes my way knocks them all out of my head.
Isn't college life magnificent? It's so funny to think I hated it that
first day. But if I hadn't I might never got really acquainted with you.
Anne, please tell me over again that you like me a little bit. I yearn
to hear it."

"I like you a big bit--and I think you're a dear, sweet, adorable,
velvety, clawless, little--kitten," laughed Anne, "but I don't see when
you ever get time to learn your lessons."

Phil must have found time for she held her own in every class of her
year. Even the grumpy old professor of Mathematics, who detested coeds,
and had bitterly opposed their admission to Redmond, couldn't floor her.
She led the freshettes everywhere, except in English, where Anne Shirley
left her far behind. Anne herself found the studies of her Freshman year
very easy, thanks in great part to the steady work she and Gilbert had
put in during those two past years in Avonlea. This left her more time
for a social life which she thoroughly enjoyed. But never for a moment
did she forget Avonlea and the friends there. To her, the happiest
moments in each week were those in which letters came from home. It
was not until she had got her first letters that she began to think
she could ever like Kingsport or feel at home there. Before they came,
Avonlea had seemed thousands of miles away; those letters brought it
near and linked the old life to the new so closely that they began to
seem one and the same, instead of two hopelessly segregated existences.
The first batch contained six letters, from Jane Andrews, Ruby Gillis,
Diana Barry, Marilla, Mrs. Lynde and Davy. Jane's was a copperplate
production, with every "t" nicely crossed and every "i" precisely
dotted, and not an interesting sentence in it. She never mentioned the
school, concerning which Anne was avid to hear; she never answered one
of the questions Anne had asked in her letter. But she told Anne how
many yards of lace she had recently crocheted, and the kind of weather
they were having in Avonlea, and how she intended to have her new dress
made, and the way she felt when her head ached. Ruby Gillis wrote a
gushing epistle deploring Anne's absence, assuring her she was horribly
missed in everything, asking what the Redmond "fellows" were like, and
filling the rest with accounts of her own harrowing experiences with her
numerous admirers. It was a silly, harmless letter, and Anne would have
laughed over it had it not been for the postscript. "Gilbert seems to be
enjoying Redmond, judging from his letters," wrote Ruby. "I don't think
Charlie is so stuck on it."

So Gilbert was writing to Ruby! Very well. He had a perfect right to,
of course. Only--!! Anne did not know that Ruby had written the first
letter and that Gilbert had answered it from mere courtesy. She tossed
Ruby's letter aside contemptuously. But it took all Diana's breezy,
newsy, delightful epistle to banish the sting of Ruby's postscript.
Diana's letter contained a little too much Fred, but was otherwise
crowded and crossed with items of interest, and Anne almost felt herself
back in Avonlea while reading it. Marilla's was a rather prim and
colorless epistle, severely innocent of gossip or emotion. Yet somehow
it conveyed to Anne a whiff of the wholesome, simple life at Green
Gables, with its savor of ancient peace, and the steadfast abiding love
that was there for her. Mrs. Lynde's letter was full of church news.
Having broken up housekeeping, Mrs. Lynde had more time than ever to
devote to church affairs and had flung herself into them heart and soul.
She was at present much worked up over the poor "supplies" they were
having in the vacant Avonlea pulpit.

"I don't believe any but fools enter the ministry nowadays," she wrote
bitterly. "Such candidates as they have sent us, and such stuff as
they preach! Half of it ain't true, and, what's worse, it ain't sound
doctrine. The one we have now is the worst of the lot. He mostly takes
a text and preaches about something else. And he says he doesn't believe
all the heathen will be eternally lost. The idea! If they won't all the
money we've been giving to Foreign Missions will be clean wasted, that's
what! Last Sunday night he announced that next Sunday he'd preach on the
axe-head that swam. I think he'd better confine himself to the Bible and
leave sensational subjects alone. Things have come to a pretty pass if
a minister can't find enough in Holy Writ to preach about, that's what.
What church do you attend, Anne? I hope you go regularly. People are apt
to get so careless about church-going away from home, and I understand
college students are great sinners in this respect. I'm told many of
them actually study their lessons on Sunday. I hope you'll never sink
that low, Anne. Remember how you were brought up. And be very careful
what friends you make. You never know what sort of creatures are in them
colleges. Outwardly they may be as whited sepulchers and inwardly as
ravening wolves, that's what. You'd better not have anything to say to
any young man who isn't from the Island.

"I forgot to tell you what happened the day the minister called here. It
was the funniest thing I ever saw. I said to Marilla, 'If Anne had been
here wouldn't she have had a laugh?' Even Marilla laughed. You know he's
a very short, fat little man with bow legs. Well, that old pig of Mr.
Harrison's--the big, tall one--had wandered over here that day again and
broke into the yard, and it got into the back porch, unbeknowns to us,
and it was there when the minister appeared in the doorway. It made one
wild bolt to get out, but there was nowhere to bolt to except between
them bow legs. So there it went, and, being as it was so big and the
minister so little, it took him clean off his feet and carried him away.
His hat went one way and his cane another, just as Marilla and I got to
the door. I'll never forget the look of him. And that poor pig was near
scared to death. I'll never be able to read that account in the Bible
of the swine that rushed madly down the steep place into the sea without
seeing Mr. Harrison's pig careering down the hill with that minister. I
guess the pig thought he had the Old Boy on his back instead of inside
of him. I was thankful the twins weren't about. It wouldn't have been
the right thing for them to have seen a minister in such an undignified
predicament. Just before they got to the brook the minister jumped off
or fell off. The pig rushed through the brook like mad and up through
the woods. Marilla and I run down and helped the minister get up and
brush his coat. He wasn't hurt, but he was mad. He seemed to hold
Marilla and me responsible for it all, though we told him the pig didn't
belong to us, and had been pestering us all summer. Besides, what did he
come to the back door for? You'd never have caught Mr. Allan doing that.
It'll be a long time before we get a man like Mr. Allan. But it's an
ill wind that blows no good. We've never seen hoof or hair of that pig
since, and it's my belief we never will.

"Things is pretty quiet in Avonlea. I don't find Green Gables as
lonesome as I expected. I think I'll start another cotton warp quilt
this winter. Mrs. Silas Sloane has a handsome new apple-leaf pattern.

"When I feel that I must have some excitement I read the murder trials
in that Boston paper my niece sends me. I never used to do it, but
they're real interesting. The States must be an awful place. I hope
you'll never go there, Anne. But the way girls roam over the earth now
is something terrible. It always makes me think of Satan in the Book of
Job, going to and fro and walking up and down. I don't believe the Lord
ever intended it, that's what.

"Davy has been pretty good since you went away. One day he was bad and
Marilla punished him by making him wear Dora's apron all day, and then
he went and cut all Dora's aprons up. I spanked him for that and then he
went and chased my rooster to death.

"The MacPhersons have moved down to my place. She's a great housekeeper
and very particular. She's rooted all my June lilies up because she says
they make a garden look so untidy. Thomas set them lilies out when we
were married. Her husband seems a nice sort of a man, but she can't get
over being an old maid, that's what.

"Don't study too hard, and be sure and put your winter underclothes on
as soon as the weather gets cool. Marilla worries a lot about you, but I
tell her you've got a lot more sense than I ever thought you would have
at one time, and that you'll be all right."

Davy's letter plunged into a grievance at the start.

"Dear anne, please write and tell marilla not to tie me to the rale of
the bridge when I go fishing the boys make fun of me when she does. Its
awful lonesome here without you but grate fun in school. Jane andrews
is crosser than you. I scared mrs. lynde with a jacky lantern last nite.
She was offel mad and she was mad cause I chased her old rooster round
the yard till he fell down ded. I didn't mean to make him fall down ded.
What made him die, anne, I want to know. mrs. lynde threw him into the
pig pen she mite of sold him to mr. blair. mr. blair is giving 50 sense
apeace for good ded roosters now. I herd mrs. lynde asking the minister
to pray for her. What did she do that was so bad, anne, I want to know.
I've got a kite with a magnificent tail, anne. Milty bolter told me a
grate story in school yesterday. it is troo. old Joe Mosey and Leon were
playing cards one nite last week in the woods. The cards were on a stump
and a big black man bigger than the trees come along and grabbed the
cards and the stump and disapered with a noys like thunder. Ill bet they
were skared. Milty says the black man was the old harry. was he, anne, I
want to know. Mr. kimball over at spenservale is very sick and will have
to go to the hospitable. please excuse me while I ask marilla if thats
spelled rite. Marilla says its the silem he has to go to not the other
place. He thinks he has a snake inside of him. whats it like to have a
snake inside of you, anne. I want to know. mrs. lawrence bell is sick
to. mrs. lynde says that all that is the matter with her is that she
thinks too much about her insides."

"I wonder," said Anne, as she folded up her letters, "what Mrs. Lynde
would think of Philippa."




Chapter VI

In the Park


"What are you going to do with yourselves today, girls?" asked Philippa,
popping into Anne's room one Saturday afternoon.

"We are going for a walk in the park," answered Anne. "I ought to stay
in and finish my blouse. But I couldn't sew on a day like this. There's
something in the air that gets into my blood and makes a sort of glory
in my soul. My fingers would twitch and I'd sew a crooked seam. So it's
ho for the park and the pines."

"Does 'we' include any one but yourself and Priscilla?"

"Yes, it includes Gilbert and Charlie, and we'll be very glad if it will
include you, also."

"But," said Philippa dolefully, "if I go I'll have to be gooseberry, and
that will be a new experience for Philippa Gordon."

"Well, new experiences are broadening. Come along, and you'll be able
to sympathize with all poor souls who have to play gooseberry often. But
where are all the victims?"

"Oh, I was tired of them all and simply couldn't be bothered with any
of them today. Besides, I've been feeling a little blue--just a pale,
elusive azure. It isn't serious enough for anything darker. I wrote Alec
and Alonzo last week. I put the letters into envelopes and addressed
them, but I didn't seal them up. That evening something funny happened.
That is, Alec would think it funny, but Alonzo wouldn't be likely to.
I was in a hurry, so I snatched Alec's letter--as I thought--out of the
envelope and scribbled down a postscript. Then I mailed both letters. I
got Alonzo's reply this morning. Girls, I had put that postscript to his
letter and he was furious. Of course he'll get over it--and I don't
care if he doesn't--but it spoiled my day. So I thought I'd come to you
darlings to get cheered up. After the football season opens I won't
have any spare Saturday afternoons. I adore football. I've got the most
gorgeous cap and sweater striped in Redmond colors to wear to the games.
To be sure, a little way off I'll look like a walking barber's pole.
Do you know that that Gilbert of yours has been elected Captain of the
Freshman football team?"

"Yes, he told us so last evening," said Priscilla, seeing that outraged
Anne would not answer. "He and Charlie were down. We knew they were
coming, so we painstakingly put out of sight or out of reach all Miss
Ada's cushions. That very elaborate one with the raised embroidery I
dropped on the floor in the corner behind the chair it was on. I thought
it would be safe there. But would you believe it? Charlie Sloane made
for that chair, noticed the cushion behind it, solemnly fished it up,
and sat on it the whole evening. Such a wreck of a cushion as it was!
Poor Miss Ada asked me today, still smiling, but oh, so reproachfully,
why I had allowed it to be sat upon. I told her I hadn't--that it was
a matter of predestination coupled with inveterate Sloanishness and I
wasn't a match for both combined."

"Miss Ada's cushions are really getting on my nerves," said Anne. "She
finished two new ones last week, stuffed and embroidered within an inch
of their lives. There being absolutely no other cushionless place to
put them she stood them up against the wall on the stair landing. They
topple over half the time and if we come up or down the stairs in the
dark we fall over them. Last Sunday, when Dr. Davis prayed for all those
exposed to the perils of the sea, I added in thought 'and for all those
who live in houses where cushions are loved not wisely but too well!'
There! we're ready, and I see the boys coming through Old St. John's. Do
you cast in your lot with us, Phil?"

"I'll go, if I can walk with Priscilla and Charlie. That will be a
bearable degree of gooseberry. That Gilbert of yours is a darling, Anne,
but why does he go around so much with Goggle-eyes?"

Anne stiffened. She had no great liking for Charlie Sloane; but he was
of Avonlea, so no outsider had any business to laugh at him.

"Charlie and Gilbert have always been friends," she said coldly.
"Charlie is a nice boy. He's not to blame for his eyes."

"Don't tell me that! He is! He must have done something dreadful in a
previous existence to be punished with such eyes. Pris and I are going
to have such sport with him this afternoon. We'll make fun of him to his
face and he'll never know it."

Doubtless, "the abandoned P's," as Anne called them, did carry out their
amiable intentions. But Sloane was blissfully ignorant; he thought he
was quite a fine fellow to be walking with two such coeds, especially
Philippa Gordon, the class beauty and belle. It must surely impress
Anne. She would see that some people appreciated him at his real value.

Gilbert and Anne loitered a little behind the others, enjoying the calm,
still beauty of the autumn afternoon under the pines of the park, on the
road that climbed and twisted round the harbor shore.

"The silence here is like a prayer, isn't it?" said Anne, her face
upturned to the shining sky. "How I love the pines! They seem to strike
their roots deep into the romance of all the ages. It is so comforting
to creep away now and then for a good talk with them. I always feel so
happy out here."

           "'And so in mountain solitudes o'ertaken
               As by some spell divine,
           Their cares drop from them like the needles shaken
               From out the gusty pine,'"

quoted Gilbert.

"They make our little ambitions seem rather petty, don't they, Anne?"

"I think, if ever any great sorrow came to me, I would come to the pines
for comfort," said Anne dreamily.

"I hope no great sorrow ever will come to you, Anne," said Gilbert, who
could not connect the idea of sorrow with the vivid, joyous creature
beside him, unwitting that those who can soar to the highest heights can
also plunge to the deepest depths, and that the natures which enjoy most
keenly are those which also suffer most sharply.

"But there must--sometime," mused Anne. "Life seems like a cup of glory
held to my lips just now. But there must be some bitterness in it--there
is in every cup. I shall taste mine some day. Well, I hope I shall be
strong and brave to meet it. And I hope it won't be through my own
fault that it will come. Do you remember what Dr. Davis said last Sunday
evening--that the sorrows God sent us brought comfort and strength
with them, while the sorrows we brought on ourselves, through folly
or wickedness, were by far the hardest to bear? But we mustn't talk
of sorrow on an afternoon like this. It's meant for the sheer joy of
living, isn't it?"

"If I had my way I'd shut everything out of your life but happiness and
pleasure, Anne," said Gilbert in the tone that meant "danger ahead."

"Then you would be very unwise," rejoined Anne hastily. "I'm sure no
life can be properly developed and rounded out without some trial and
sorrow--though I suppose it is only when we are pretty comfortable that
we admit it. Come--the others have got to the pavilion and are beckoning
to us."

They all sat down in the little pavilion to watch an autumn sunset of
deep red fire and pallid gold. To their left lay Kingsport, its roofs
and spires dim in their shroud of violet smoke. To their right lay the
harbor, taking on tints of rose and copper as it stretched out into the
sunset. Before them the water shimmered, satin smooth and silver gray,
and beyond, clean shaven William's Island loomed out of the mist,
guarding the town like a sturdy bulldog. Its lighthouse beacon flared
through the mist like a baleful star, and was answered by another in the
far horizon.

"Did you ever see such a strong-looking place?" asked Philippa. "I don't
want William's Island especially, but I'm sure I couldn't get it if I
did. Look at that sentry on the summit of the fort, right beside the
flag. Doesn't he look as if he had stepped out of a romance?"

"Speaking of romance," said Priscilla, "we've been looking for
heather--but, of course, we couldn't find any. It's too late in the
season, I suppose."

"Heather!" exclaimed Anne. "Heather doesn't grow in America, does it?"

"There are just two patches of it in the whole continent," said Phil,
"one right here in the park, and one somewhere else in Nova Scotia, I
forget where. The famous Highland Regiment, the Black Watch, camped here
one year, and, when the men shook out the straw of their beds in the
spring, some seeds of heather took root."

"Oh, how delightful!" said enchanted Anne.

"Let's go home around by Spofford Avenue," suggested Gilbert. "We can
see all 'the handsome houses where the wealthy nobles dwell.' Spofford
Avenue is the finest residential street in Kingsport. Nobody can build
on it unless he's a millionaire."

"Oh, do," said Phil. "There's a perfectly killing little place I want to
show you, Anne. IT wasn't built by a millionaire. It's the first place
after you leave the park, and must have grown while Spofford Avenue was
still a country road. It DID grow--it wasn't built! I don't care for the
houses on the Avenue. They're too brand new and plateglassy. But this
little spot is a dream--and its name--but wait till you see it."

They saw it as they walked up the pine-fringed hill from the park. Just
on the crest, where Spofford Avenue petered out into a plain road, was
a little white frame house with groups of pines on either side of it,
stretching their arms protectingly over its low roof. It was covered
with red and gold vines, through which its green-shuttered windows
peeped. Before it was a tiny garden, surrounded by a low stone wall.
October though it was, the garden was still very sweet with dear,
old-fashioned, unworldly flowers and shrubs--sweet may, southern-wood,
lemon verbena, alyssum, petunias, marigolds and chrysanthemums. A tiny
brick wall, in herring-bone pattern, led from the gate to the front
porch. The whole place might have been transplanted from some remote
country village; yet there was something about it that made its
nearest neighbor, the big lawn-encircled palace of a tobacco king, look
exceedingly crude and showy and ill-bred by contrast. As Phil said, it
was the difference between being born and being made.

"It's the dearest place I ever saw," said Anne delightedly. "It gives
me one of my old, delightful funny aches. It's dearer and quainter than
even Miss Lavendar's stone house."

"It's the name I want you to notice especially," said Phil. "Look--in
white letters, around the archway over the gate. 'Patty's Place.' Isn't
that killing? Especially on this Avenue of Pinehursts and Elmwolds and
Cedarcrofts? 'Patty's Place,' if you please! I adore it."

"Have you any idea who Patty is?" asked Priscilla.

"Patty Spofford is the name of the old lady who owns it, I've
discovered. She lives there with her niece, and they've lived there for
hundreds of years, more or less--maybe a little less, Anne. Exaggeration
is merely a flight of poetic fancy. I understand that wealthy folk have
tried to buy the lot time and again--it's really worth a small fortune
now, you know--but 'Patty' won't sell upon any consideration.
And there's an apple orchard behind the house in place of a back
yard--you'll see it when we get a little past--a real apple orchard on
Spofford Avenue!"

"I'm going to dream about 'Patty's Place' tonight," said Anne. "Why, I
feel as if I belonged to it. I wonder if, by any chance, we'll ever see
the inside of it."

"It isn't likely," said Priscilla.

Anne smiled mysteriously.

"No, it isn't likely. But I believe it will happen. I have a queer,
creepy, crawly feeling--you can call it a presentiment, if you
like--that 'Patty's Place' and I are going to be better acquainted yet."




Chapter VII

Home Again


Those first three weeks at Redmond had seemed long; but the rest of
the term flew by on wings of wind. Before they realized it the Redmond
students found themselves in the grind of Christmas examinations,
emerging therefrom more or less triumphantly. The honor of leading in
the Freshman classes fluctuated between Anne, Gilbert and Philippa;
Priscilla did very well; Charlie Sloane scraped through respectably, and
comported himself as complacently as if he had led in everything.

"I can't really believe that this time tomorrow I'll be in Green
Gables," said Anne on the night before departure. "But I shall be. And
you, Phil, will be in Bolingbroke with Alec and Alonzo."

"I'm longing to see them," admitted Phil, between the chocolate she was
nibbling. "They really are such dear boys, you know. There's to be no
end of dances and drives and general jamborees. I shall never forgive
you, Queen Anne, for not coming home with me for the holidays."

"'Never' means three days with you, Phil. It was dear of you to ask
me--and I'd love to go to Bolingbroke some day. But I can't go this
year--I MUST go home. You don't know how my heart longs for it."

"You won't have much of a time," said Phil scornfully. "There'll be one
or two quilting parties, I suppose; and all the old gossips will talk
you over to your face and behind your back. You'll die of lonesomeness,
child."

"In Avonlea?" said Anne, highly amused.

"Now, if you'd come with me you'd have a perfectly gorgeous time.
Bolingbroke would go wild over you, Queen Anne--your hair and your style
and, oh, everything! You're so DIFFERENT. You'd be such a success--and
I would bask in reflected glory--'not the rose but near the rose.' Do
come, after all, Anne."

"Your picture of social triumphs is quite fascinating, Phil, but I'll
paint one to offset it. I'm going home to an old country farmhouse, once
green, rather faded now, set among leafless apple orchards. There is a
brook below and a December fir wood beyond, where I've heard harps swept
by the fingers of rain and wind. There is a pond nearby that will be
gray and brooding now. There will be two oldish ladies in the house,
one tall and thin, one short and fat; and there will be two twins, one
a perfect model, the other what Mrs. Lynde calls a 'holy terror.' There
will be a little room upstairs over the porch, where old dreams hang
thick, and a big, fat, glorious feather bed which will almost seem the
height of luxury after a boardinghouse mattress. How do you like my
picture, Phil?"

"It seems a very dull one," said Phil, with a grimace.

"Oh, but I've left out the transforming thing," said Anne softly.
"There'll be love there, Phil--faithful, tender love, such as I'll never
find anywhere else in the world--love that's waiting for me. That makes
my picture a masterpiece, doesn't it, even if the colors are not very
brilliant?"

Phil silently got up, tossed her box of chocolates away, went up to
Anne, and put her arms about her.

"Anne, I wish I was like you," she said soberly.

Diana met Anne at the Carmody station the next night, and they drove
home together under silent, star-sown depths of sky. Green Gables had a
very festal appearance as they drove up the lane. There was a light in
every window, the glow breaking out through the darkness like flame-red
blossoms swung against the dark background of the Haunted Wood. And in
the yard was a brave bonfire with two gay little figures dancing around
it, one of which gave an unearthly yell as the buggy turned in under the
poplars.

"Davy means that for an Indian war-whoop," said Diana. "Mr. Harrison's
hired boy taught it to him, and he's been practicing it up to welcome
you with. Mrs. Lynde says it has worn her nerves to a frazzle. He creeps
up behind her, you know, and then lets go. He was determined to have a
bonfire for you, too. He's been piling up branches for a fortnight
and pestering Marilla to be let pour some kerosene oil over it before
setting it on fire. I guess she did, by the smell, though Mrs. Lynde
said up to the last that Davy would blow himself and everybody else up
if he was let."

Anne was out of the buggy by this time, and Davy was rapturously hugging
her knees, while even Dora was clinging to her hand.

"Isn't that a bully bonfire, Anne? Just let me show you how to poke
it--see the sparks? I did it for you, Anne, 'cause I was so glad you
were coming home."

The kitchen door opened and Marilla's spare form darkened against the
inner light. She preferred to meet Anne in the shadows, for she
was horribly afraid that she was going to cry with joy--she, stern,
repressed Marilla, who thought all display of deep emotion unseemly.
Mrs. Lynde was behind her, sonsy, kindly, matronly, as of yore. The love
that Anne had told Phil was waiting for her surrounded her and enfolded
her with its blessing and its sweetness. Nothing, after all, could
compare with old ties, old friends, and old Green Gables! How starry
Anne's eyes were as they sat down to the loaded supper table, how pink
her cheeks, how silver-clear her laughter! And Diana was going to stay
all night, too. How like the dear old times it was! And the rose-bud
tea-set graced the table! With Marilla the force of nature could no
further go.

"I suppose you and Diana will now proceed to talk all night," said
Marilla sarcastically, as the girls went upstairs. Marilla was always
sarcastic after any self-betrayal.

"Yes," agreed Anne gaily, "but I'm going to put Davy to bed first. He
insists on that."

"You bet," said Davy, as they went along the hall. "I want somebody to
say my prayers to again. It's no fun saying them alone."

"You don't say them alone, Davy. God is always with you to hear you."

"Well, I can't see Him," objected Davy. "I want to pray to somebody I
can see, but I WON'T say them to Mrs. Lynde or Marilla, there now!"

Nevertheless, when Davy was garbed in his gray flannel nighty, he did
not seem in a hurry to begin. He stood before Anne, shuffling one bare
foot over the other, and looked undecided.

"Come, dear, kneel down," said Anne.

Davy came and buried his head in Anne's lap, but he did not kneel down.

"Anne," he said in a muffled voice. "I don't feel like praying after
all. I haven't felt like it for a week now. I--I DIDN'T pray last night
nor the night before."

"Why not, Davy?" asked Anne gently.

"You--you won't be mad if I tell you?" implored Davy.

Anne lifted the little gray-flannelled body on her knee and cuddled his
head on her arm.

"Do I ever get 'mad' when you tell me things, Davy?"

"No-o-o, you never do. But you get sorry, and that's worse. You'll be
awful sorry when I tell you this, Anne--and you'll be 'shamed of me, I
s'pose."

"Have you done something naughty, Davy, and is that why you can't say
your prayers?"

"No, I haven't done anything naughty--yet. But I want to do it."

"What is it, Davy?"

"I--I want to say a bad word, Anne," blurted out Davy, with a desperate
effort. "I heard Mr. Harrison's hired boy say it one day last week,
and ever since I've been wanting to say it ALL the time--even when I'm
saying my prayers."

"Say it then, Davy."

Davy lifted his flushed face in amazement.

"But, Anne, it's an AWFUL bad word."

"SAY IT!"

Davy gave her another incredulous look, then in a low voice he said the
dreadful word. The next minute his face was burrowing against her.

"Oh, Anne, I'll never say it again--never. I'll never WANT to say it
again. I knew it was bad, but I didn't s'pose it was so--so--I didn't
s'pose it was like THAT."

"No, I don't think you'll ever want to say it again, Davy--or think it,
either. And I wouldn't go about much with Mr. Harrison's hired boy if I
were you."

"He can make bully war-whoops," said Davy a little regretfully.

"But you don't want your mind filled with bad words, do you, Davy--words
that will poison it and drive out all that is good and manly?"

"No," said Davy, owl-eyed with introspection.

"Then don't go with those people who use them. And now do you feel as if
you could say your prayers, Davy?"

"Oh, yes," said Davy, eagerly wriggling down on his knees, "I can say
them now all right. I ain't scared now to say 'if I should die before I
wake,' like I was when I was wanting to say that word."

Probably Anne and Diana did empty out their souls to each other that
night, but no record of their confidences has been preserved. They both
looked as fresh and bright-eyed at breakfast as only youth can look
after unlawful hours of revelry and confession. There had been no snow
up to this time, but as Diana crossed the old log bridge on her homeward
way the white flakes were beginning to flutter down over the fields
and woods, russet and gray in their dreamless sleep. Soon the far-away
slopes and hills were dim and wraith-like through their gauzy scarfing,
as if pale autumn had flung a misty bridal veil over her hair and was
waiting for her wintry bridegroom. So they had a white Christmas after
all, and a very pleasant day it was. In the forenoon letters and gifts
came from Miss Lavendar and Paul; Anne opened them in the cheerful Green
Gables kitchen, which was filled with what Davy, sniffing in ecstasy,
called "pretty smells."

"Miss Lavendar and Mr. Irving are settled in their new home now,"
reported Anne. "I am sure Miss Lavendar is perfectly happy--I know it
by the general tone of her letter--but there's a note from Charlotta the
Fourth. She doesn't like Boston at all, and she is fearfully homesick.
Miss Lavendar wants me to go through to Echo Lodge some day while
I'm home and light a fire to air it, and see that the cushions aren't
getting moldy. I think I'll get Diana to go over with me next week, and
we can spend the evening with Theodora Dix. I want to see Theodora. By
the way, is Ludovic Speed still going to see her?"

"They say so," said Marilla, "and he's likely to continue it. Folks have
given up expecting that that courtship will ever arrive anywhere."

"I'd hurry him up a bit, if I was Theodora, that's what," said Mrs.
Lynde. And there is not the slightest doubt but that she would.

There was also a characteristic scrawl from Philippa, full of Alec and
Alonzo, what they said and what they did, and how they looked when they
saw her.

"But I can't make up my mind yet which to marry," wrote Phil. "I do wish
you had come with me to decide for me. Some one will have to. When I saw
Alec my heart gave a great thump and I thought, 'He might be the right
one.' And then, when Alonzo came, thump went my heart again. So that's
no guide, though it should be, according to all the novels I've ever
read. Now, Anne, YOUR heart wouldn't thump for anybody but the genuine
Prince Charming, would it? There must be something radically wrong with
mine. But I'm having a perfectly gorgeous time. How I wish you were
here! It's snowing today, and I'm rapturous. I was so afraid we'd have
a green Christmas and I loathe them. You know, when Christmas is a dirty
grayey-browney affair, looking as if it had been left over a hundred
years ago and had been in soak ever since, it is called a GREEN
Christmas! Don't ask me why. As Lord Dundreary says, 'there are thome
thingth no fellow can underthtand.'

"Anne, did you ever get on a street car and then discover that you
hadn't any money with you to pay your fare? I did, the other day. It's
quite awful. I had a nickel with me when I got on the car. I thought it
was in the left pocket of my coat. When I got settled down comfortably
I felt for it. It wasn't there. I had a cold chill. I felt in the other
pocket. Not there. I had another chill. Then I felt in a little inside
pocket. All in vain. I had two chills at once.

"I took off my gloves, laid them on the seat, and went over all my
pockets again. It was not there. I stood up and shook myself, and then
looked on the floor. The car was full of people, who were going home
from the opera, and they all stared at me, but I was past caring for a
little thing like that.

"But I could not find my fare. I concluded I must have put it in my
mouth and swallowed it inadvertently.

"I didn't know what to do. Would the conductor, I wondered, stop the
car and put me off in ignominy and shame? Was it possible that I could
convince him that I was merely the victim of my own absentmindedness,
and not an unprincipled creature trying to obtain a ride upon false
pretenses? How I wished that Alec or Alonzo were there. But they weren't
because I wanted them. If I HADN'T wanted them they would have been
there by the dozen. And I couldn't decide what to say to the conductor
when he came around. As soon as I got one sentence of explanation
mapped out in my mind I felt nobody could believe it and I must compose
another. It seemed there was nothing to do but trust in Providence, and
for all the comfort that gave me I might as well have been the old lady
who, when told by the captain during a storm that she must put her trust
in the Almighty exclaimed, 'Oh, Captain, is it as bad as that?'

"Just at the conventional moment, when all hope had fled, and the
conductor was holding out his box to the passenger next to me, I
suddenly remembered where I had put that wretched coin of the realm.
I hadn't swallowed it after all. I meekly fished it out of the index
finger of my glove and poked it in the box. I smiled at everybody and
felt that it was a beautiful world."

The visit to Echo Lodge was not the least pleasant of many pleasant
holiday outings. Anne and Diana went back to it by the old way of the
beech woods, carrying a lunch basket with them. Echo Lodge, which had
been closed ever since Miss Lavendar's wedding, was briefly thrown open
to wind and sunshine once more, and firelight glimmered again in the
little rooms. The perfume of Miss Lavendar's rose bowl still filled the
air. It was hardly possible to believe that Miss Lavendar would not come
tripping in presently, with her brown eyes a-star with welcome, and
that Charlotta the Fourth, blue of bow and wide of smile, would not
pop through the door. Paul, too, seemed hovering around, with his fairy
fancies.

"It really makes me feel a little bit like a ghost revisiting the old
time glimpses of the moon," laughed Anne. "Let's go out and see if the
echoes are at home. Bring the old horn. It is still behind the kitchen
door."

The echoes were at home, over the white river, as silver-clear and
multitudinous as ever; and when they had ceased to answer the girls
locked up Echo Lodge again and went away in the perfect half hour that
follows the rose and saffron of a winter sunset.




Chapter VIII

Anne's First Proposal


The old year did not slip away in a green twilight, with a pinky-yellow
sunset. Instead, it went out with a wild, white bluster and blow. It was
one of the nights when the storm-wind hurtles over the frozen meadows
and black hollows, and moans around the eaves like a lost creature, and
drives the snow sharply against the shaking panes.

"Just the sort of night people like to cuddle down between their
blankets and count their mercies," said Anne to Jane Andrews, who had
come up to spend the afternoon and stay all night. But when they were
cuddled between their blankets, in Anne's little porch room, it was not
her mercies of which Jane was thinking.

"Anne," she said very solemnly, "I want to tell you something. May I"

Anne was feeling rather sleepy after the party Ruby Gillis had given the
night before. She would much rather have gone to sleep than listen
to Jane's confidences, which she was sure would bore her. She had no
prophetic inkling of what was coming. Probably Jane was engaged,
too; rumor averred that Ruby Gillis was engaged to the Spencervale
schoolteacher, about whom all the girls were said to be quite wild.

"I'll soon be the only fancy-free maiden of our old quartet," thought
Anne, drowsily. Aloud she said, "Of course."

"Anne," said Jane, still more solemnly, "what do you think of my brother
Billy?"

Anne gasped over this unexpected question, and floundered helplessly
in her thoughts. Goodness, what DID she think of Billy Andrews? She
had never thought ANYTHING about him--round-faced, stupid, perpetually
smiling, good-natured Billy Andrews. Did ANYBODY ever think about Billy
Andrews?

"I--I don't understand, Jane," she stammered. "What do you
mean--exactly?"

"Do you like Billy?" asked Jane bluntly.

"Why--why--yes, I like him, of course," gasped Anne, wondering if she
were telling the literal truth. Certainly she did not DISlike Billy.
But could the indifferent tolerance with which she regarded him, when he
happened to be in her range of vision, be considered positive enough for
liking? WHAT was Jane trying to elucidate?

"Would you like him for a husband?" asked Jane calmly.

"A husband!" Anne had been sitting up in bed, the better to wrestle with
the problem of her exact opinion of Billy Andrews. Now she fell flatly
back on her pillows, the very breath gone out of her. "Whose husband?"

"Yours, of course," answered Jane. "Billy wants to marry you. He's
always been crazy about you--and now father has given him the upper farm
in his own name and there's nothing to prevent him from getting married.
But he's so shy he couldn't ask you himself if you'd have him, so he got
me to do it. I'd rather not have, but he gave me no peace till I said I
would, if I got a good chance. What do you think about it, Anne?"

Was it a dream? Was it one of those nightmare things in which you find
yourself engaged or married to some one you hate or don't know, without
the slightest idea how it ever came about? No, she, Anne Shirley, was
lying there, wide awake, in her own bed, and Jane Andrews was beside
her, calmly proposing for her brother Billy. Anne did not know whether
she wanted to writhe or laugh; but she could do neither, for Jane's
feelings must not be hurt.

"I--I couldn't marry Bill, you know, Jane," she managed to gasp. "Why,
such an idea never occurred to me--never!"

"I don't suppose it did," agreed Jane. "Billy has always been far too
shy to think of courting. But you might think it over, Anne. Billy is a
good fellow. I must say that, if he is my brother. He has no bad habits
and he's a great worker, and you can depend on him. 'A bird in the hand
is worth two in the bush.' He told me to tell you he'd be quite willing
to wait till you got through college, if you insisted, though he'd
RATHER get married this spring before the planting begins. He'd always
be very good to you, I'm sure, and you know, Anne, I'd love to have you
for a sister."

"I can't marry Billy," said Anne decidedly. She had recovered her wits,
and was even feeling a little angry. It was all so ridiculous. "There is
no use thinking of it, Jane. I don't care anything for him in that way,
and you must tell him so."

"Well, I didn't suppose you would," said Jane with a resigned sigh,
feeling that she had done her best. "I told Billy I didn't believe it
was a bit of use to ask you, but he insisted. Well, you've made your
decision, Anne, and I hope you won't regret it."

Jane spoke rather coldly. She had been perfectly sure that the enamored
Billy had no chance at all of inducing Anne to marry him. Nevertheless,
she felt a little resentment that Anne Shirley, who was, after all,
merely an adopted orphan, without kith or kin, should refuse her
brother--one of the Avonlea Andrews. Well, pride sometimes goes before a
fall, Jane reflected ominously.

Anne permitted herself to smile in the darkness over the idea that she
might ever regret not marrying Billy Andrews.

"I hope Billy won't feel very badly over it," she said nicely.

Jane made a movement as if she were tossing her head on her pillow.

"Oh, he won't break his heart. Billy has too much good sense for that.
He likes Nettie Blewett pretty well, too, and mother would rather he
married her than any one. She's such a good manager and saver. I think,
when Billy is once sure you won't have him, he'll take Nettie. Please
don't mention this to any one, will you, Anne?"

"Certainly not," said Anne, who had no desire whatever to publish abroad
the fact that Billy Andrews wanted to marry her, preferring her, when
all was said and done, to Nettie Blewett. Nettie Blewett!

"And now I suppose we'd better go to sleep," suggested Jane.

To sleep went Jane easily and speedily; but, though very unlike MacBeth
in most respects, she had certainly contrived to murder sleep for Anne.
That proposed-to damsel lay on a wakeful pillow until the wee sma's, but
her meditations were far from being romantic. It was not, however, until
the next morning that she had an opportunity to indulge in a good laugh
over the whole affair. When Jane had gone home--still with a hint of
frost in voice and manner because Anne had declined so ungratefully
and decidedly the honor of an alliance with the House of Andrews--Anne
retreated to the porch room, shut the door, and had her laugh out at
last.

"If I could only share the joke with some one!" she thought. "But I
can't. Diana is the only one I'd want to tell, and, even if I hadn't
sworn secrecy to Jane, I can't tell Diana things now. She tells
everything to Fred--I know she does. Well, I've had my first proposal. I
supposed it would come some day--but I certainly never thought it would
be by proxy. It's awfully funny--and yet there's a sting in it, too,
somehow."

Anne knew quite well wherein the sting consisted, though she did not put
it into words. She had had her secret dreams of the first time some one
should ask her the great question. And it had, in those dreams, always
been very romantic and beautiful: and the "some one" was to be very
handsome and dark-eyed and distinguished-looking and eloquent, whether
he were Prince Charming to be enraptured with "yes," or one to whom a
regretful, beautifully worded, but hopeless refusal must be given. If
the latter, the refusal was to be expressed so delicately that it would
be next best thing to acceptance, and he would go away, after kissing
her hand, assuring her of his unalterable, life-long devotion. And it
would always be a beautiful memory, to be proud of and a little sad
about, also.

And now, this thrilling experience had turned out to be merely
grotesque. Billy Andrews had got his sister to propose for him because
his father had given him the upper farm; and if Anne wouldn't "have him"
Nettie Blewett would. There was romance for you, with a vengeance! Anne
laughed--and then sighed. The bloom had been brushed from one little
maiden dream. Would the painful process go on until everything became
prosaic and hum-drum?




Chapter IX


An Unwelcome Lover and a Welcome Friend


The second term at Redmond sped as quickly as had the first--"actually
whizzed away," Philippa said. Anne enjoyed it thoroughly in all its
phases--the stimulating class rivalry, the making and deepening of new
and helpful friendships, the gay little social stunts, the doings of the
various societies of which she was a member, the widening of horizons
and interests. She studied hard, for she had made up her mind to win the
Thorburn Scholarship in English. This being won, meant that she could
come back to Redmond the next year without trenching on Marilla's small
savings--something Anne was determined she would not do.

Gilbert, too, was in full chase after a scholarship, but found plenty
of time for frequent calls at Thirty-eight, St. John's. He was Anne's
escort at nearly all the college affairs, and she knew that their names
were coupled in Redmond gossip. Anne raged over this but was helpless;
she could not cast an old friend like Gilbert aside, especially when
he had grown suddenly wise and wary, as behooved him in the dangerous
proximity of more than one Redmond youth who would gladly have taken his
place by the side of the slender, red-haired coed, whose gray eyes were
as alluring as stars of evening. Anne was never attended by the crowd of
willing victims who hovered around Philippa's conquering march through
her Freshman year; but there was a lanky, brainy Freshie, a jolly,
little, round Sophomore, and a tall, learned Junior who all liked to
call at Thirty-eight, St. John's, and talk over 'ologies and 'isms, as
well as lighter subjects, with Anne, in the becushioned parlor of that
domicile. Gilbert did not love any of them, and he was exceedingly
careful to give none of them the advantage over him by any untimely
display of his real feelings Anne-ward. To her he had become again the
boy-comrade of Avonlea days, and as such could hold his own against
any smitten swain who had so far entered the lists against him. As a
companion, Anne honestly acknowledged nobody could be so satisfactory as
Gilbert; she was very glad, so she told herself, that he had evidently
dropped all nonsensical ideas--though she spent considerable time
secretly wondering why.

Only one disagreeable incident marred that winter. Charlie Sloane,
sitting bolt upright on Miss Ada's most dearly beloved cushion, asked
Anne one night if she would promise "to become Mrs. Charlie Sloane some
day." Coming after Billy Andrews' proxy effort, this was not quite the
shock to Anne's romantic sensibilities that it would otherwise have
been; but it was certainly another heart-rending disillusion. She was
angry, too, for she felt that she had never given Charlie the slightest
encouragement to suppose such a thing possible. But what could you
expect of a Sloane, as Mrs. Rachel Lynde would ask scornfully? Charlie's
whole attitude, tone, air, words, fairly reeked with Sloanishness. "He
was conferring a great honor--no doubt whatever about that. And when
Anne, utterly insensible to the honor, refused him, as delicately and
considerately as she could--for even a Sloane had feelings which ought
not to be unduly lacerated--Sloanishness still further betrayed itself.
Charlie certainly did not take his dismissal as Anne's imaginary
rejected suitors did. Instead, he became angry, and showed it; he said
two or three quite nasty things; Anne's temper flashed up mutinously and
she retorted with a cutting little speech whose keenness pierced even
Charlie's protective Sloanishness and reached the quick; he caught up
his hat and flung himself out of the house with a very red face; Anne
rushed upstairs, falling twice over Miss Ada's cushions on the way,
and threw herself on her bed, in tears of humiliation and rage. Had
she actually stooped to quarrel with a Sloane? Was it possible anything
Charlie Sloane could say had power to make her angry? Oh, this was
degradation, indeed--worse even than being the rival of Nettie Blewett!

"I wish I need never see the horrible creature again," she sobbed
vindictively into her pillows.

She could not avoid seeing him again, but the outraged Charlie took care
that it should not be at very close quarters. Miss Ada's cushions were
henceforth safe from his depredations, and when he met Anne on the
street, or in Redmond's halls, his bow was icy in the extreme. Relations
between these two old schoolmates continued to be thus strained for
nearly a year! Then Charlie transferred his blighted affections to a
round, rosy, snub-nosed, blue-eyed, little Sophomore who appreciated
them as they deserved, whereupon he forgave Anne and condescended to be
civil to her again; in a patronizing manner intended to show her just
what she had lost.

One day Anne scurried excitedly into Priscilla's room.

"Read that," she cried, tossing Priscilla a letter. "It's from
Stella--and she's coming to Redmond next year--and what do you think of
her idea? I think it's a perfectly splendid one, if we can only carry it
out. Do you suppose we can, Pris?"

"I'll be better able to tell you when I find out what it is," said
Priscilla, casting aside a Greek lexicon and taking up Stella's letter.
Stella Maynard had been one of their chums at Queen's Academy and had
been teaching school ever since.

"But I'm going to give it up, Anne dear," she wrote, "and go to college
next year. As I took the third year at Queen's I can enter the Sophomore
year. I'm tired of teaching in a back country school. Some day I'm going
to write a treatise on 'The Trials of a Country Schoolmarm.' It will
be a harrowing bit of realism. It seems to be the prevailing impression
that we live in clover, and have nothing to do but draw our quarter's
salary. My treatise shall tell the truth about us. Why, if a week should
pass without some one telling me that I am doing easy work for big pay I
would conclude that I might as well order my ascension robe 'immediately
and to onct.' 'Well, you get your money easy,' some rate-payer will
tell me, condescendingly. 'All you have to do is to sit there and hear
lessons.' I used to argue the matter at first, but I'm wiser now.
Facts are stubborn things, but as some one has wisely said, not half so
stubborn as fallacies. So I only smile loftily now in eloquent silence.
Why, I have nine grades in my school and I have to teach a little of
everything, from investigating the interiors of earthworms to the study
of the solar system. My youngest pupil is four--his mother sends him to
school to 'get him out of the way'--and my oldest twenty--it 'suddenly
struck him' that it would be easier to go to school and get an education
than follow the plough any longer. In the wild effort to cram all sorts
of research into six hours a day I don't wonder if the children feel
like the little boy who was taken to see the biograph. 'I have to look
for what's coming next before I know what went last,' he complained. I
feel like that myself.

"And the letters I get, Anne! Tommy's mother writes me that Tommy is not
coming on in arithmetic as fast as she would like. He is only in simple
reduction yet, and Johnny Johnson is in fractions, and Johnny isn't half
as smart as her Tommy, and she can't understand it. And Susy's father
wants to know why Susy can't write a letter without misspelling half
the words, and Dick's aunt wants me to change his seat, because that bad
Brown boy he is sitting with is teaching him to say naughty words.

"As to the financial part--but I'll not begin on that. Those whom the
gods wish to destroy they first make country schoolmarms!

"There, I feel better, after that growl. After all, I've enjoyed these
past two years. But I'm coming to Redmond.

"And now, Anne, I've a little plan. You know how I loathe boarding.
I've boarded for four years and I'm so tired of it. I don't feel like
enduring three years more of it.

"Now, why can't you and Priscilla and I club together, rent a little
house somewhere in Kingsport, and board ourselves? It would be cheaper
than any other way. Of course, we would have to have a housekeeper and
I have one ready on the spot. You've heard me speak of Aunt Jamesina?
She's the sweetest aunt that ever lived, in spite of her name. She can't
help that! She was called Jamesina because her father, whose name was
James, was drowned at sea a month before she was born. I always call her
Aunt Jimsie. Well, her only daughter has recently married and gone to
the foreign mission field. Aunt Jamesina is left alone in a great big
house, and she is horribly lonesome. She will come to Kingsport and keep
house for us if we want her, and I know you'll both love her. The more
I think of the plan the more I like it. We could have such good,
independent times.

"Now, if you and Priscilla agree to it, wouldn't it be a good idea
for you, who are on the spot, to look around and see if you can find a
suitable house this spring? That would be better than leaving it till
the fall. If you could get a furnished one so much the better, but if
not, we can scare up a few sticks of finiture between us and old family
friends with attics. Anyhow, decide as soon as you can and write me, so
that Aunt Jamesina will know what plans to make for next year."

"I think it's a good idea," said Priscilla.

"So do I," agreed Anne delightedly. "Of course, we have a nice
boardinghouse here, but, when all's said and done, a boardinghouse isn't
home. So let's go house-hunting at once, before exams come on."

"I'm afraid it will be hard enough to get a really suitable house,"
warned Priscilla. "Don't expect too much, Anne. Nice houses in nice
localities will probably be away beyond our means. We'll likely have to
content ourselves with a shabby little place on some street whereon live
people whom to know is to be unknown, and make life inside compensate
for the outside."

Accordingly they went house-hunting, but to find just what they wanted
proved even harder than Priscilla had feared. Houses there were galore,
furnished and unfurnished; but one was too big, another too small; this
one too expensive, that one too far from Redmond. Exams were on and
over; the last week of the term came and still their "house o'dreams,"
as Anne called it, remained a castle in the air.

"We shall have to give up and wait till the fall, I suppose," said
Priscilla wearily, as they rambled through the park on one of April's
darling days of breeze and blue, when the harbor was creaming and
shimmering beneath the pearl-hued mists floating over it. "We may find
some shack to shelter us then; and if not, boardinghouses we shall have
always with us."

"I'm not going to worry about it just now, anyway, and spoil this lovely
afternoon," said Anne, gazing around her with delight. The fresh chill
air was faintly charged with the aroma of pine balsam, and the sky above
was crystal clear and blue--a great inverted cup of blessing. "Spring is
singing in my blood today, and the lure of April is abroad on the air.
I'm seeing visions and dreaming dreams, Pris. That's because the wind is
from the west. I do love the west wind. It sings of hope and gladness,
doesn't it? When the east wind blows I always think of sorrowful rain
on the eaves and sad waves on a gray shore. When I get old I shall have
rheumatism when the wind is east."

"And isn't it jolly when you discard furs and winter garments for
the first time and sally forth, like this, in spring attire?" laughed
Priscilla. "Don't you feel as if you had been made over new?"

"Everything is new in the spring," said Anne. "Springs themselves are
always so new, too. No spring is ever just like any other spring. It
always has something of its own to be its own peculiar sweetness. See
how green the grass is around that little pond, and how the willow buds
are bursting."

"And exams are over and gone--the time of Convocation will come
soon--next Wednesday. This day next week we'll be home."

"I'm glad," said Anne dreamily. "There are so many things I want to do.
I want to sit on the back porch steps and feel the breeze blowing down
over Mr. Harrison's fields. I want to hunt ferns in the Haunted Wood
and gather violets in Violet Vale. Do you remember the day of our golden
picnic, Priscilla? I want to hear the frogs singing and the poplars
whispering. But I've learned to love Kingsport, too, and I'm glad I'm
coming back next fall. If I hadn't won the Thorburn I don't believe I
could have. I COULDN'T take any of Marilla's little hoard."

"If we could only find a house!" sighed Priscilla. "Look over there at
Kingsport, Anne--houses, houses everywhere, and not one for us."

"Stop it, Pris. 'The best is yet to be.' Like the old Roman, we'll find
a house or build one. On a day like this there's no such word as fail in
my bright lexicon."

They lingered in the park until sunset, living in the amazing miracle
and glory and wonder of the springtide; and they went home as usual, by
way of Spofford Avenue, that they might have the delight of looking at
Patty's Place.

"I feel as if something mysterious were going to happen right away--'by
the pricking of my thumbs,'" said Anne, as they went up the slope.
"It's a nice story-bookish feeling. Why--why--why! Priscilla Grant, look
over there and tell me if it's true, or am I seein' things?"

Priscilla looked. Anne's thumbs and eyes had not deceived her. Over the
arched gateway of Patty's Place dangled a little, modest sign. It said
"To Let, Furnished. Inquire Within."

"Priscilla," said Anne, in a whisper, "do you suppose it's possible that
we could rent Patty's Place?"

"No, I don't," averred Priscilla. "It would be too good to be
true. Fairy tales don't happen nowadays. I won't hope, Anne. The
disappointment would be too awful to bear. They're sure to want more for
it than we can afford. Remember, it's on Spofford Avenue."

"We must find out anyhow," said Anne resolutely. "It's too late to call
this evening, but we'll come tomorrow. Oh, Pris, if we can get this
darling spot! I've always felt that my fortunes were linked with Patty's
Place, ever since I saw it first."




Chapter X

Patty's Place


The next evening found them treading resolutely the herring-bone walk
through the tiny garden. The April wind was filling the pine trees with
its roundelay, and the grove was alive with robins--great, plump, saucy
fellows, strutting along the paths. The girls rang rather timidly, and
were admitted by a grim and ancient handmaiden. The door opened directly
into a large living-room, where by a cheery little fire sat two other
ladies, both of whom were also grim and ancient. Except that one looked
to be about seventy and the other fifty, there seemed little
difference between them. Each had amazingly big, light-blue eyes behind
steel-rimmed spectacles; each wore a cap and a gray shawl; each was
knitting without haste and without rest; each rocked placidly and looked
at the girls without speaking; and just behind each sat a large white
china dog, with round green spots all over it, a green nose and green
ears. Those dogs captured Anne's fancy on the spot; they seemed like the
twin guardian deities of Patty's Place.

For a few minutes nobody spoke. The girls were too nervous to find
words, and neither the ancient ladies nor the china dogs seemed
conversationally inclined. Anne glanced about the room. What a dear
place it was! Another door opened out of it directly into the pine grove
and the robins came boldly up on the very step. The floor was spotted
with round, braided mats, such as Marilla made at Green Gables, but
which were considered out of date everywhere else, even in Avonlea. And
yet here they were on Spofford Avenue! A big, polished grandfather's
clock ticked loudly and solemnly in a corner. There were delightful
little cupboards over the mantelpiece, behind whose glass doors
gleamed quaint bits of china. The walls were hung with old prints and
silhouettes. In one corner the stairs went up, and at the first low turn
was a long window with an inviting seat. It was all just as Anne had
known it must be.

By this time the silence had grown too dreadful, and Priscilla nudged
Anne to intimate that she must speak.

"We--we--saw by your sign that this house is to let," said Anne faintly,
addressing the older lady, who was evidently Miss Patty Spofford.

"Oh, yes," said Miss Patty. "I intended to take that sign down today."

"Then--then we are too late," said Anne sorrowfully. "You've let it to
some one else?"

"No, but we have decided not to let it at all."

"Oh, I'm so sorry," exclaimed Anne impulsively. "I love this place so. I
did hope we could have got it."

Then did Miss Patty lay down her knitting, take off her specs, rub them,
put them on again, and for the first time look at Anne as at a human
being. The other lady followed her example so perfectly that she might
as well have been a reflection in a mirror.

"You LOVE it," said Miss Patty with emphasis. "Does that mean that
you really LOVE it? Or that you merely like the looks of it? The girls
nowadays indulge in such exaggerated statements that one never can tell
what they DO mean. It wasn't so in my young days. THEN a girl did not
say she LOVED turnips, in just the same tone as she might have said she
loved her mother or her Savior."

Anne's conscience bore her up.

"I really do love it," she said gently. "I've loved it ever since I saw
it last fall. My two college chums and I want to keep house next year
instead of boarding, so we are looking for a little place to rent; and
when I saw that this house was to let I was so happy."

"If you love it, you can have it," said Miss Patty. "Maria and I decided
today that we would not let it after all, because we did not like any of
the people who have wanted it. We don't HAVE to let it. We can afford to
go to Europe even if we don't let it. It would help us out, but not for
gold will I let my home pass into the possession of such people as have
come here and looked at it. YOU are different. I believe you do love it
and will be good to it. You can have it."

"If--if we can afford to pay what you ask for it," hesitated Anne.

Miss Patty named the amount required. Anne and Priscilla looked at each
other. Priscilla shook her head.

"I'm afraid we can't afford quite so much," said Anne, choking back her
disappointment. "You see, we are only college girls and we are poor."

"What were you thinking you could afford?" demanded Miss Patty, ceasing
not to knit.

Anne named her amount. Miss Patty nodded gravely.

"That will do. As I told you, it is not strictly necessary that we
should let it at all. We are not rich, but we have enough to go to
Europe on. I have never been in Europe in my life, and never expected or
wanted to go. But my niece there, Maria Spofford, has taken a fancy
to go. Now, you know a young person like Maria can't go globetrotting
alone."

"No--I--I suppose not," murmured Anne, seeing that Miss Patty was quite
solemnly in earnest.

"Of course not. So I have to go along to look after her. I expect to
enjoy it, too; I'm seventy years old, but I'm not tired of living yet.
I daresay I'd have gone to Europe before if the idea had occurred to me.
We shall be away for two years, perhaps three. We sail in June and
we shall send you the key, and leave all in order for you to take
possession when you choose. We shall pack away a few things we prize
especially, but all the rest will be left."

"Will you leave the china dogs?" asked Anne timidly.

"Would you like me to?"

"Oh, indeed, yes. They are delightful."

A pleased expression came into Miss Patty's face.

"I think a great deal of those dogs," she said proudly. "They are over
a hundred years old, and they have sat on either side of this fireplace
ever since my brother Aaron brought them from London fifty years ago.
Spofford Avenue was called after my brother Aaron."

"A fine man he was," said Miss Maria, speaking for the first time. "Ah,
you don't see the like of him nowadays."

"He was a good uncle to you, Maria," said Miss Patty, with evident
emotion. "You do well to remember him."

"I shall always remember him," said Miss Maria solemnly. "I can see him,
this minute, standing there before that fire, with his hands under his
coat-tails, beaming on us."

Miss Maria took out her handkerchief and wiped her eyes; but Miss Patty
came resolutely back from the regions of sentiment to those of business.

"I shall leave the dogs where they are, if you will promise to be very
careful of them," she said. "Their names are Gog and Magog. Gog looks
to the right and Magog to the left. And there's just one thing more. You
don't object, I hope, to this house being called Patty's Place?"

"No, indeed. We think that is one of the nicest things about it."

"You have sense, I see," said Miss Patty in a tone of great
satisfaction. "Would you believe it? All the people who came here to
rent the house wanted to know if they couldn't take the name off the
gate during their occupation of it. I told them roundly that the name
went with the house. This has been Patty's Place ever since my brother
Aaron left it to me in his will, and Patty's Place it shall remain until
I die and Maria dies. After that happens the next possessor can call it
any fool name he likes," concluded Miss Patty, much as she might have
said, "After that--the deluge." "And now, wouldn't you like to go over
the house and see it all before we consider the bargain made?"

Further exploration still further delighted the girls. Besides the
big living-room, there was a kitchen and a small bedroom downstairs.
Upstairs were three rooms, one large and two small. Anne took an
especial fancy to one of the small ones, looking out into the big
pines, and hoped it would be hers. It was papered in pale blue and had
a little, old-timey toilet table with sconces for candles. There was a
diamond-paned window with a seat under the blue muslin frills that would
be a satisfying spot for studying or dreaming.

"It's all so delicious that I know we are going to wake up and find it a
fleeting vision of the night," said Priscilla as they went away.

"Miss Patty and Miss Maria are hardly such stuff as dreams are made of,"
laughed Anne. "Can you fancy them 'globe-trotting'--especially in those
shawls and caps?"

"I suppose they'll take them off when they really begin to trot," said
Priscilla, "but I know they'll take their knitting with them everywhere.
They simply couldn't be parted from it. They will walk about Westminster
Abbey and knit, I feel sure. Meanwhile, Anne, we shall be living in
Patty's Place--and on Spofford Avenue. I feel like a millionairess even
now."

"I feel like one of the morning stars that sang for joy," said Anne.

Phil Gordon crept into Thirty-eight, St. John's, that night and flung
herself on Anne's bed.

"Girls, dear, I'm tired to death. I feel like the man without a
country--or was it without a shadow? I forget which. Anyway, I've been
packing up."

"And I suppose you are worn out because you couldn't decide which things
to pack first, or where to put them," laughed Priscilla.

"E-zackly. And when I had got everything jammed in somehow, and my
landlady and her maid had both sat on it while I locked it, I discovered
I had packed a whole lot of things I wanted for Convocation at the very
bottom. I had to unlock the old thing and poke and dive into it for an
hour before I fished out what I wanted. I would get hold of something
that felt like what I was looking for, and I'd yank it up, and it would
be something else. No, Anne, I did NOT swear."

"I didn't say you did."

"Well, you looked it. But I admit my thoughts verged on the profane. And
I have such a cold in the head--I can do nothing but sniffle, sigh
and sneeze. Isn't that alliterative agony for you? Queen Anne, do say
something to cheer me up."

"Remember that next Thursday night, you'll be back in the land of Alec
and Alonzo," suggested Anne.

Phil shook her head dolefully.

"More alliteration. No, I don't want Alec and Alonzo when I have a
cold in the head. But what has happened you two? Now that I look at
you closely you seem all lighted up with an internal iridescence. Why,
you're actually SHINING! What's up?"

"We are going to live in Patty's Place next winter," said Anne
triumphantly. "Live, mark you, not board! We've rented it, and Stella
Maynard is coming, and her aunt is going to keep house for us."

Phil bounced up, wiped her nose, and fell on her knees before Anne.

"Girls--girls--let me come, too. Oh, I'll be so good. If there's no room
for me I'll sleep in the little doghouse in the orchard--I've seen it.
Only let me come."

"Get up, you goose."

"I won't stir off my marrow bones till you tell me I can live with you
next winter."

Anne and Priscilla looked at each other. Then Anne said slowly, "Phil
dear, we'd love to have you. But we may as well speak plainly. I'm
poor--Pris is poor--Stella Maynard is poor--our housekeeping will have
to be very simple and our table plain. You'd have to live as we would.
Now, you are rich and your boardinghouse fare attests the fact."

"Oh, what do I care for that?" demanded Phil tragically. "Better a
dinner of herbs where your chums are than a stalled ox in a lonely
boardinghouse. Don't think I'm ALL stomach, girls. I'll be willing to
live on bread and water--with just a LEETLE jam--if you'll let me come."

"And then," continued Anne, "there will be a good deal of work to be
done. Stella's aunt can't do it all. We all expect to have our chores to
do. Now, you--"

"Toil not, neither do I spin," finished Philippa. "But I'll learn to do
things. You'll only have to show me once. I CAN make my own bed to begin
with. And remember that, though I can't cook, I CAN keep my temper.
That's something. And I NEVER growl about the weather. That's more. Oh,
please, please! I never wanted anything so much in my life--and this
floor is awfully hard."

"There's just one more thing," said Priscilla resolutely. "You, Phil,
as all Redmond knows, entertain callers almost every evening. Now, at
Patty's Place we can't do that. We have decided that we shall be at home
to our friends on Friday evenings only. If you come with us you'll have
to abide by that rule."

"Well, you don't think I'll mind that, do you? Why, I'm glad of it.
I knew I should have had some such rule myself, but I hadn't enough
decision to make it or stick to it. When I can shuffle off the
responsibility on you it will be a real relief. If you won't let me cast
in my lot with you I'll die of the disappointment and then I'll come
back and haunt you. I'll camp on the very doorstep of Patty's Place and
you won't be able to go out or come in without falling over my spook."

Again Anne and Priscilla exchanged eloquent looks.

"Well," said Anne, "of course we can't promise to take you until we've
consulted with Stella; but I don't think she'll object, and, as far as
we are concerned, you may come and glad welcome."

"If you get tired of our simple life you can leave us, and no questions
asked," added Priscilla.

Phil sprang up, hugged them both jubilantly, and went on her way
rejoicing.

"I hope things will go right," said Priscilla soberly.

"We must MAKE them go right," avowed Anne. "I think Phil will fit into
our 'appy little 'ome very well."

"Oh, Phil's a dear to rattle round with and be chums. And, of course,
the more there are of us the easier it will be on our slim purses. But
how will she be to live with? You have to summer and winter with any one
before you know if she's LIVABLE or not."

"Oh, well, we'll all be put to the test, as far as that goes. And
we must quit us like sensible folk, living and let live. Phil isn't
selfish, though she's a little thoughtless, and I believe we will all
get on beautifully in Patty's Place."




Chapter XI

The Round of Life


Anne was back in Avonlea with the luster of the Thorburn Scholarship
on her brow. People told her she hadn't changed much, in a tone which
hinted they were surprised and a little disappointed she hadn't. Avonlea
had not changed, either. At least, so it seemed at first. But as Anne
sat in the Green Gables pew, on the first Sunday after her return, and
looked over the congregation, she saw several little changes which, all
coming home to her at once, made her realize that time did not quite
stand still, even in Avonlea. A new minister was in the pulpit. In the
pews more than one familiar face was missing forever. Old "Uncle Abe,"
his prophesying over and done with, Mrs. Peter Sloane, who had sighed,
it was to be hoped, for the last time, Timothy Cotton, who, as Mrs.
Rachel Lynde said "had actually managed to die at last after practicing
at it for twenty years," and old Josiah Sloane, whom nobody knew in his
coffin because he had his whiskers neatly trimmed, were all sleeping in
the little graveyard behind the church. And Billy Andrews was married
to Nettie Blewett! They "appeared out" that Sunday. When Billy, beaming
with pride and happiness, showed his be-plumed and be-silked bride into
the Harmon Andrews' pew, Anne dropped her lids to hide her dancing eyes.
She recalled the stormy winter night of the Christmas holidays when Jane
had proposed for Billy. He certainly had not broken his heart over his
rejection. Anne wondered if Jane had also proposed to Nettie for him, or
if he had mustered enough spunk to ask the fateful question himself. All
the Andrews family seemed to share in his pride and pleasure, from
Mrs. Harmon in the pew to Jane in the choir. Jane had resigned from the
Avonlea school and intended to go West in the fall.

"Can't get a beau in Avonlea, that's what," said Mrs. Rachel Lynde
scornfully. "SAYS she thinks she'll have better health out West. I never
heard her health was poor before."

"Jane is a nice girl," Anne had said loyally. "She never tried to
attract attention, as some did."

"Oh, she never chased the boys, if that's what you mean," said Mrs.
Rachel. "But she'd like to be married, just as much as anybody, that's
what. What else would take her out West to some forsaken place whose
only recommendation is that men are plenty and women scarce? Don't you
tell me!"

But it was not at Jane, Anne gazed that day in dismay and surprise. It
was at Ruby Gillis, who sat beside her in the choir. What had happened
to Ruby? She was even handsomer than ever; but her blue eyes were
too bright and lustrous, and the color of her cheeks was hectically
brilliant; besides, she was very thin; the hands that held her hymn-book
were almost transparent in their delicacy.

"Is Ruby Gillis ill?" Anne asked of Mrs. Lynde, as they went home from
church.

"Ruby Gillis is dying of galloping consumption," said Mrs. Lynde
bluntly. "Everybody knows it except herself and her FAMILY. They won't
give in. If you ask THEM, she's perfectly well. She hasn't been able
to teach since she had that attack of congestion in the winter, but she
says she's going to teach again in the fall, and she's after the White
Sands school. She'll be in her grave, poor girl, when White Sands school
opens, that's what."

Anne listened in shocked silence. Ruby Gillis, her old school-chum,
dying? Could it be possible? Of late years they had grown apart; but the
old tie of school-girl intimacy was there, and made itself felt sharply
in the tug the news gave at Anne's heartstrings. Ruby, the brilliant,
the merry, the coquettish! It was impossible to associate the thought of
her with anything like death. She had greeted Anne with gay cordiality
after church, and urged her to come up the next evening.

"I'll be away Tuesday and Wednesday evenings," she had whispered
triumphantly. "There's a concert at Carmody and a party at White Sands.
Herb Spencer's going to take me. He's my LATEST. Be sure to come up
tomorrow. I'm dying for a good talk with you. I want to hear all about
your doings at Redmond."

Anne knew that Ruby meant that she wanted to tell Anne all about her own
recent flirtations, but she promised to go, and Diana offered to go with
her.

"I've been wanting to go to see Ruby for a long while," she told Anne,
when they left Green Gables the next evening, "but I really couldn't
go alone. It's so awful to hear Ruby rattling on as she does, and
pretending there is nothing the matter with her, even when she can
hardly speak for coughing. She's fighting so hard for her life, and yet
she hasn't any chance at all, they say."

The girls walked silently down the red, twilit road. The robins were
singing vespers in the high treetops, filling the golden air with their
jubilant voices. The silver fluting of the frogs came from marshes and
ponds, over fields where seeds were beginning to stir with life and
thrill to the sunshine and rain that had drifted over them. The air
was fragrant with the wild, sweet, wholesome smell of young raspberry
copses. White mists were hovering in the silent hollows and violet stars
were shining bluely on the brooklands.

"What a beautiful sunset," said Diana. "Look, Anne, it's just like a
land in itself, isn't it? That long, low back of purple cloud is the
shore, and the clear sky further on is like a golden sea."

"If we could sail to it in the moonshine boat Paul wrote of in his old
composition--you remember?--how nice it would be," said Anne, rousing
from her reverie. "Do you think we could find all our yesterdays there,
Diana--all our old springs and blossoms? The beds of flowers that Paul
saw there are the roses that have bloomed for us in the past?"

"Don't!" said Diana. "You make me feel as if we were old women with
everything in life behind us."

"I think I've almost felt as if we were since I heard about poor Ruby,"
said Anne. "If it is true that she is dying any other sad thing might be
true, too."

"You don't mind calling in at Elisha Wright's for a moment, do you?"
asked Diana. "Mother asked me to leave this little dish of jelly for
Aunt Atossa."

"Who is Aunt Atossa?"

"Oh, haven't you heard? She's Mrs. Samson Coates of Spencervale--Mrs.
Elisha Wright's aunt. She's father's aunt, too. Her husband died last
winter and she was left very poor and lonely, so the Wrights took her to
live with them. Mother thought we ought to take her, but father put his
foot down. Live with Aunt Atossa he would not."

"Is she so terrible?" asked Anne absently.

"You'll probably see what she's like before we can get away," said Diana
significantly. "Father says she has a face like a hatchet--it cuts the
air. But her tongue is sharper still."

Late as it was Aunt Atossa was cutting potato sets in the Wright
kitchen. She wore a faded old wrapper, and her gray hair was decidedly
untidy. Aunt Atossa did not like being "caught in a kilter," so she went
out of her way to be disagreeable.

"Oh, so you're Anne Shirley?" she said, when Diana introduced Anne.
"I've heard of you." Her tone implied that she had heard nothing good.
"Mrs. Andrews was telling me you were home. She said you had improved a
good deal."

There was no doubt Aunt Atossa thought there was plenty of room for
further improvement. She ceased not from cutting sets with much energy.

"Is it any use to ask you to sit down?" she inquired sarcastically. "Of
course, there's nothing very entertaining here for you. The rest are all
away."

"Mother sent you this little pot of rhubarb jelly," said Diana
pleasantly. "She made it today and thought you might like some."

"Oh, thanks," said Aunt Atossa sourly. "I never fancy your mother's
jelly--she always makes it too sweet. However, I'll try to worry some
down. My appetite's been dreadful poor this spring. I'm far from well,"
continued Aunt Atossa solemnly, "but still I keep a-doing. People who
can't work aren't wanted here. If it isn't too much trouble will you be
condescending enough to set the jelly in the pantry? I'm in a hurry to
get these spuds done tonight. I suppose you two LADIES never do anything
like this. You'd be afraid of spoiling your hands."

"I used to cut potato sets before we rented the farm," smiled Anne.

"I do it yet," laughed Diana. "I cut sets three days last week. Of
course," she added teasingly, "I did my hands up in lemon juice and kid
gloves every night after it."

Aunt Atossa sniffed.

"I suppose you got that notion out of some of those silly magazines you
read so many of. I wonder your mother allows you. But she always spoiled
you. We all thought when George married her she wouldn't be a suitable
wife for him."

Aunt Atossa sighed heavily, as if all forebodings upon the occasion of
George Barry's marriage had been amply and darkly fulfilled.

"Going, are you?" she inquired, as the girls rose. "Well, I suppose you
can't find much amusement talking to an old woman like me. It's such a
pity the boys ain't home."

"We want to run in and see Ruby Gillis a little while," explained Diana.

"Oh, anything does for an excuse, of course," said Aunt Atossa, amiably.
"Just whip in and whip out before you have time to say how-do decently.
It's college airs, I s'pose. You'd be wiser to keep away from Ruby
Gillis. The doctors say consumption's catching. I always knew Ruby'd get
something, gadding off to Boston last fall for a visit. People who ain't
content to stay home always catch something."

"People who don't go visiting catch things, too. Sometimes they even
die," said Diana solemnly.

"Then they don't have themselves to blame for it," retorted Aunt Atossa
triumphantly. "I hear you are to be married in June, Diana."

"There is no truth in that report," said Diana, blushing.

"Well, don't put it off too long," said Aunt Atossa significantly.
"You'll fade soon--you're all complexion and hair. And the Wrights are
terrible fickle. You ought to wear a hat, MISS SHIRLEY. Your nose is
freckling scandalous. My, but you ARE redheaded! Well, I s'pose we're
all as the Lord made us! Give Marilla Cuthbert my respects. She's never
been to see me since I come to Avonlea, but I s'pose I oughtn't to
complain. The Cuthberts always did think themselves a cut higher than
any one else round here."

"Oh, isn't she dreadful?" gasped Diana, as they escaped down the lane.

"She's worse than Miss Eliza Andrews," said Anne. "But then think of
living all your life with a name like Atossa! Wouldn't it sour almost
any one? She should have tried to imagine her name was Cordelia. It
might have helped her a great deal. It certainly helped me in the days
when I didn't like ANNE."

"Josie Pye will be just like her when she grows up," said Diana.
"Josie's mother and Aunt Atossa are cousins, you know. Oh, dear, I'm
glad that's over. She's so malicious--she seems to put a bad flavor in
everything. Father tells such a funny story about her. One time they had
a minister in Spencervale who was a very good, spiritual man but very
deaf. He couldn't hear any ordinary conversation at all. Well, they used
to have a prayer meeting on Sunday evenings, and all the church members
present would get up and pray in turn, or say a few words on some Bible
verse. But one evening Aunt Atossa bounced up. She didn't either pray or
preach. Instead, she lit into everybody else in the church and gave them
a fearful raking down, calling them right out by name and telling them
how they all had behaved, and casting up all the quarrels and scandals
of the past ten years. Finally she wound up by saying that she was
disgusted with Spencervale church and she never meant to darken its door
again, and she hoped a fearful judgment would come upon it. Then she sat
down out of breath, and the minister, who hadn't heard a word she said,
immediately remarked, in a very devout voice, 'amen! The Lord grant our
dear sister's prayer!' You ought to hear father tell the story."

"Speaking of stories, Diana," remarked Anne, in a significant,
confidential tone, "do you know that lately I have been wondering if
I could write a short story--a story that would be good enough to be
published?"

"Why, of course you could," said Diana, after she had grasped the
amazing suggestion. "You used to write perfectly thrilling stories years
ago in our old Story Club."

"Well, I hardly meant one of that kind of stories," smiled Anne. "I've
been thinking about it a little of late, but I'm almost afraid to try,
for, if I should fail, it would be too humiliating."

"I heard Priscilla say once that all Mrs. Morgan's first stories were
rejected. But I'm sure yours wouldn't be, Anne, for it's likely editors
have more sense nowadays."

"Margaret Burton, one of the Junior girls at Redmond, wrote a story last
winter and it was published in the Canadian Woman. I really do think I
could write one at least as good."

"And will you have it published in the Canadian Woman?"

"I might try one of the bigger magazines first. It all depends on what
kind of a story I write."

"What is it to be about?"

"I don't know yet. I want to get hold of a good plot. I believe this
is very necessary from an editor's point of view. The only thing I've
settled on is the heroine's name. It is to be AVERIL LESTER. Rather
pretty, don't you think? Don't mention this to any one, Diana. I haven't
told anybody but you and Mr. Harrison. HE wasn't very encouraging--he
said there was far too much trash written nowadays as it was, and he'd
expected something better of me, after a year at college."

"What does Mr. Harrison know about it?" demanded Diana scornfully.

They found the Gillis home gay with lights and callers. Leonard Kimball,
of Spencervale, and Morgan Bell, of Carmody, were glaring at each other
across the parlor. Several merry girls had dropped in. Ruby was dressed
in white and her eyes and cheeks were very brilliant. She laughed and
chattered incessantly, and after the other girls had gone she took Anne
upstairs to display her new summer dresses.

"I've a blue silk to make up yet, but it's a little heavy for summer
wear. I think I'll leave it until the fall. I'm going to teach in White
Sands, you know. How do you like my hat? That one you had on in church
yesterday was real dinky. But I like something brighter for myself.
Did you notice those two ridiculous boys downstairs? They've both come
determined to sit each other out. I don't care a single bit about either
of them, you know. Herb Spencer is the one I like. Sometimes I really
do think he's MR. RIGHT. At Christmas I thought the Spencervale
schoolmaster was that. But I found out something about him that turned
me against him. He nearly went insane when I turned him down. I wish
those two boys hadn't come tonight. I wanted to have a nice good talk
with you, Anne, and tell you such heaps of things. You and I were always
good chums, weren't we?"

Ruby slipped her arm about Anne's waist with a shallow little laugh. But
just for a moment their eyes met, and, behind all the luster of Ruby's,
Anne saw something that made her heart ache.

"Come up often, won't you, Anne?" whispered Ruby. "Come alone--I want
you."

"Are you feeling quite well, Ruby?"

"Me! Why, I'm perfectly well. I never felt better in my life. Of course,
that congestion last winter pulled me down a little. But just see my
color. I don't look much like an invalid, I'm sure."

Ruby's voice was almost sharp. She pulled her arm away from Anne, as
if in resentment, and ran downstairs, where she was gayer than ever,
apparently so much absorbed in bantering her two swains that Diana and
Anne felt rather out of it and soon went away.




Chapter XII

"Averil's Atonement"


"What are you dreaming of, Anne?"

The two girls were loitering one evening in a fairy hollow of the brook.
Ferns nodded in it, and little grasses were green, and wild pears hung
finely-scented, white curtains around it.

Anne roused herself from her reverie with a happy sigh.

"I was thinking out my story, Diana."

"Oh, have you really begun it?" cried Diana, all alight with eager
interest in a moment.

"Yes, I have only a few pages written, but I have it all pretty well
thought out. I've had such a time to get a suitable plot. None of the
plots that suggested themselves suited a girl named AVERIL."

"Couldn't you have changed her name?"

"No, the thing was impossible. I tried to, but I couldn't do it, any
more than I could change yours. AVERIL was so real to me that no matter
what other name I tried to give her I just thought of her as AVERIL
behind it all. But finally I got a plot that matched her. Then came the
excitement of choosing names for all my characters. You have no idea
how fascinating that is. I've lain awake for hours thinking over those
names. The hero's name is PERCEVAL DALRYMPLE."

"Have you named ALL the characters?" asked Diana wistfully. "If you
hadn't I was going to ask you to let me name one--just some unimportant
person. I'd feel as if I had a share in the story then."

"You may name the little hired boy who lived with the LESTERS," conceded
Anne. "He is not very important, but he is the only one left unnamed."

"Call him RAYMOND FITZOSBORNE," suggested Diana, who had a store of such
names laid away in her memory, relics of the old "Story Club," which she
and Anne and Jane Andrews and Ruby Gillis had had in their schooldays.

Anne shook her head doubtfully.

"I'm afraid that is too aristocratic a name for a chore boy, Diana. I
couldn't imagine a Fitzosborne feeding pigs and picking up chips, could
you?"

Diana didn't see why, if you had an imagination at all, you couldn't
stretch it to that extent; but probably Anne knew best, and the chore
boy was finally christened ROBERT RAY, to be called BOBBY should
occasion require.

"How much do you suppose you'll get for it?" asked Diana.

But Anne had not thought about this at all. She was in pursuit of fame,
not filthy lucre, and her literary dreams were as yet untainted by
mercenary considerations.

"You'll let me read it, won't you?" pleaded Diana.

"When it is finished I'll read it to you and Mr. Harrison, and I shall
want you to criticize it SEVERELY. No one else shall see it until it is
published."

"How are you going to end it--happily or unhappily?"

"I'm not sure. I'd like it to end unhappily, because that would be so
much more romantic. But I understand editors have a prejudice against
sad endings. I heard Professor Hamilton say once that nobody but a
genius should try to write an unhappy ending. And," concluded Anne
modestly, "I'm anything but a genius."

"Oh I like happy endings best. You'd better let him marry her," said
Diana, who, especially since her engagement to Fred, thought this was
how every story should end.

"But you like to cry over stories?"

"Oh, yes, in the middle of them. But I like everything to come right at
last."

"I must have one pathetic scene in it," said Anne thoughtfully. "I might
let ROBERT RAY be injured in an accident and have a death scene."

"No, you mustn't kill BOBBY off," declared Diana, laughing. "He belongs
to me and I want him to live and flourish. Kill somebody else if you
have to."

For the next fortnight Anne writhed or reveled, according to mood, in
her literary pursuits. Now she would be jubilant over a brilliant
idea, now despairing because some contrary character would NOT behave
properly. Diana could not understand this.

"MAKE them do as you want them to," she said.

"I can't," mourned Anne. "Averil is such an unmanageable heroine. She
WILL do and say things I never meant her to. Then that spoils everything
that went before and I have to write it all over again."

Finally, however, the story was finished, and Anne read it to Diana in
the seclusion of the porch gable. She had achieved her "pathetic scene"
without sacrificing ROBERT RAY, and she kept a watchful eye on Diana as
she read it. Diana rose to the occasion and cried properly; but, when
the end came, she looked a little disappointed.

"Why did you kill MAURICE LENNOX?" she asked reproachfully.

"He was the villain," protested Anne. "He had to be punished."

"I like him best of them all," said unreasonable Diana.

"Well, he's dead, and he'll have to stay dead," said Anne, rather
resentfully. "If I had let him live he'd have gone on persecuting AVERIL
and PERCEVAL."

"Yes--unless you had reformed him."

"That wouldn't have been romantic, and, besides, it would have made the
story too long."

"Well, anyway, it's a perfectly elegant story, Anne, and will make you
famous, of that I'm sure. Have you got a title for it?"

"Oh, I decided on the title long ago. I call it AVERIL'S ATONEMENT.
Doesn't that sound nice and alliterative? Now, Diana, tell me candidly,
do you see any faults in my story?"

"Well," hesitated Diana, "that part where AVERIL makes the cake doesn't
seem to me quite romantic enough to match the rest. It's just what
anybody might do. Heroines shouldn't do cooking, _I_ think."

"Why, that is where the humor comes in, and it's one of the best parts
of the whole story," said Anne. And it may be stated that in this she
was quite right.

Diana prudently refrained from any further criticism, but Mr. Harrison
was much harder to please. First he told her there was entirely too much
description in the story.

"Cut out all those flowery passages," he said unfeelingly.

Anne had an uncomfortable conviction that Mr. Harrison was right, and
she forced herself to expunge most of her beloved descriptions, though
it took three re-writings before the story could be pruned down to
please the fastidious Mr. Harrison.

"I've left out ALL the descriptions but the sunset," she said at last.
"I simply COULDN'T let it go. It was the best of them all."

"It hasn't anything to do with the story," said Mr. Harrison, "and you
shouldn't have laid the scene among rich city people. What do you know
of them? Why didn't you lay it right here in Avonlea--changing the name,
of course, or else Mrs. Rachel Lynde would probably think she was the
heroine."

"Oh, that would never have done," protested Anne. "Avonlea is the
dearest place in the world, but it isn't quite romantic enough for the
scene of a story."

"I daresay there's been many a romance in Avonlea--and many a tragedy,
too," said Mr. Harrison drily. "But your folks ain't like real folks
anywhere. They talk too much and use too high-flown language. There's
one place where that DALRYMPLE chap talks even on for two pages, and
never lets the girl get a word in edgewise. If he'd done that in real
life she'd have pitched him."

"I don't believe it," said Anne flatly. In her secret soul she thought
that the beautiful, poetical things said to AVERIL would win any girl's
heart completely. Besides, it was gruesome to hear of AVERIL, the
stately, queen-like AVERIL, "pitching" any one. AVERIL "declined her
suitors."

"Anyhow," resumed the merciless Mr. Harrison, "I don't see why MAURICE
LENNOX didn't get her. He was twice the man the other is. He did bad
things, but he did them. Perceval hadn't time for anything but mooning."

"Mooning." That was even worse than "pitching!"

"MAURICE LENNOX was the villain," said Anne indignantly. "I don't see
why every one likes him better than PERCEVAL."

"Perceval is too good. He's aggravating. Next time you write about a
hero put a little spice of human nature in him."

"AVERIL couldn't have married MAURICE. He was bad."

"She'd have reformed him. You can reform a man; you can't reform a
jelly-fish, of course. Your story isn't bad--it's kind of interesting,
I'll admit. But you're too young to write a story that would be worth
while. Wait ten years."

Anne made up her mind that the next time she wrote a story she wouldn't
ask anybody to criticize it. It was too discouraging. She would not read
the story to Gilbert, although she told him about it.

"If it is a success you'll see it when it is published, Gilbert, but if
it is a failure nobody shall ever see it."

Marilla knew nothing about the venture. In imagination Anne saw herself
reading a story out of a magazine to Marilla, entrapping her into praise
of it--for in imagination all things are possible--and then triumphantly
announcing herself the author.

One day Anne took to the Post Office a long, bulky envelope, addressed,
with the delightful confidence of youth and inexperience, to the very
biggest of the "big" magazines. Diana was as excited over it as Anne
herself.

"How long do you suppose it will be before you hear from it?" she asked.

"It shouldn't be longer than a fortnight. Oh, how happy and proud I
shall be if it is accepted!"

"Of course it will be accepted, and they will likely ask you to send
them more. You may be as famous as Mrs. Morgan some day, Anne, and then
how proud I'll be of knowing you," said Diana, who possessed, at least,
the striking merit of an unselfish admiration of the gifts and graces of
her friends.

A week of delightful dreaming followed, and then came a bitter
awakening. One evening Diana found Anne in the porch gable, with
suspicious-looking eyes. On the table lay a long envelope and a crumpled
manuscript.

"Anne, your story hasn't come back?" cried Diana incredulously.

"Yes, it has," said Anne shortly.

"Well, that editor must be crazy. What reason did he give?"

"No reason at all. There is just a printed slip saying that it wasn't
found acceptable."

"I never thought much of that magazine, anyway," said Diana hotly.
"The stories in it are not half as interesting as those in the
Canadian Woman, although it costs so much more. I suppose the editor
is prejudiced against any one who isn't a Yankee. Don't be discouraged,
Anne. Remember how Mrs. Morgan's stories came back. Send yours to the
Canadian Woman."

"I believe I will," said Anne, plucking up heart. "And if it is
published I'll send that American editor a marked copy. But I'll cut the
sunset out. I believe Mr. Harrison was right."

Out came the sunset; but in spite of this heroic mutilation the editor
of the Canadian Woman sent Averil's Atonement back so promptly that the
indignant Diana declared that it couldn't have been read at all, and
vowed she was going to stop her subscription immediately. Anne took this
second rejection with the calmness of despair. She locked the story away
in the garret trunk where the old Story Club tales reposed; but first
she yielded to Diana's entreaties and gave her a copy.

"This is the end of my literary ambitions," she said bitterly.

She never mentioned the matter to Mr. Harrison, but one evening he asked
her bluntly if her story had been accepted.

"No, the editor wouldn't take it," she answered briefly.

Mr. Harrison looked sidewise at the flushed, delicate profile.

"Well, I suppose you'll keep on writing them," he said encouragingly.

"No, I shall never try to write a story again," declared Anne, with the
hopeless finality of nineteen when a door is shut in its face.

"I wouldn't give up altogether," said Mr. Harrison reflectively. "I'd
write a story once in a while, but I wouldn't pester editors with it.
I'd write of people and places like I knew, and I'd make my characters
talk everyday English; and I'd let the sun rise and set in the usual
quiet way without much fuss over the fact. If I had to have villains
at all, I'd give them a chance, Anne--I'd give them a chance. There are
some terrible bad men in the world, I suppose, but you'd have to go a
long piece to find them--though Mrs. Lynde believes we're all bad. But
most of us have got a little decency somewhere in us. Keep on writing,
Anne."

"No. It was very foolish of me to attempt it. When I'm through Redmond
I'll stick to teaching. I can teach. I can't write stories."

"It'll be time for you to be getting a husband when you're through
Redmond," said Mr. Harrison. "I don't believe in putting marrying off
too long--like I did."

Anne got up and marched home. There were times when Mr. Harrison was
really intolerable. "Pitching," "mooning," and "getting a husband." Ow!!




Chapter XIII

The Way of Transgressors


Davy and Dora were ready for Sunday School. They were going alone, which
did not often happen, for Mrs. Lynde always attended Sunday School. But
Mrs. Lynde had twisted her ankle and was lame, so she was staying home
this morning. The twins were also to represent the family at church, for
Anne had gone away the evening before to spend Sunday with friends in
Carmody, and Marilla had one of her headaches.

Davy came downstairs slowly. Dora was waiting in the hall for him,
having been made ready by Mrs. Lynde. Davy had attended to his own
preparations. He had a cent in his pocket for the Sunday School
collection, and a five-cent piece for the church collection; he carried
his Bible in one hand and his Sunday School quarterly in the other;
he knew his lesson and his Golden Text and his catechism question
perfectly. Had he not studied them--perforce--in Mrs. Lynde's kitchen,
all last Sunday afternoon? Davy, therefore, should have been in a placid
frame of mind. As a matter of fact, despite text and catechism, he was
inwardly as a ravening wolf.

Mrs. Lynde limped out of her kitchen as he joined Dora.

"Are you clean?" she demanded severely.

"Yes--all of me that shows," Davy answered with a defiant scowl.

Mrs. Rachel sighed. She had her suspicions about Davy's neck and ears.
But she knew that if she attempted to make a personal examination Davy
would likely take to his heels and she could not pursue him today.

"Well, be sure you behave yourselves," she warned them. "Don't walk in
the dust. Don't stop in the porch to talk to the other children. Don't
squirm or wriggle in your places. Don't forget the Golden Text. Don't
lose your collection or forget to put it in. Don't whisper at prayer
time, and don't forget to pay attention to the sermon."

Davy deigned no response. He marched away down the lane, followed by the
meek Dora. But his soul seethed within. Davy had suffered, or thought he
had suffered, many things at the hands and tongue of Mrs. Rachel Lynde
since she had come to Green Gables, for Mrs. Lynde could not live with
anybody, whether they were nine or ninety, without trying to bring
them up properly. And it was only the preceding afternoon that she had
interfered to influence Marilla against allowing Davy to go fishing with
the Timothy Cottons. Davy was still boiling over this.

As soon as he was out of the lane Davy stopped and twisted his
countenance into such an unearthly and terrific contortion that Dora,
although she knew his gifts in that respect, was honestly alarmed lest
he should never in the world be able to get it straightened out again.

"Darn her," exploded Davy.

"Oh, Davy, don't swear," gasped Dora in dismay.

"'Darn' isn't swearing--not real swearing. And I don't care if it is,"
retorted Davy recklessly.

"Well, if you MUST say dreadful words don't say them on Sunday," pleaded
Dora.

Davy was as yet far from repentance, but in his secret soul he felt
that, perhaps, he had gone a little too far.

"I'm going to invent a swear word of my own," he declared.

"God will punish you if you do," said Dora solemnly.

"Then I think God is a mean old scamp," retorted Davy. "Doesn't He know
a fellow must have some way of 'spressing his feelings?"

"Davy!!!" said Dora. She expected that Davy would be struck down dead on
the spot. But nothing happened.

"Anyway, I ain't going to stand any more of Mrs. Lynde's bossing,"
spluttered Davy. "Anne and Marilla may have the right to boss me, but
SHE hasn't. I'm going to do every single thing she told me not to do.
You watch me."

In grim, deliberate silence, while Dora watched him with the fascination
of horror, Davy stepped off the green grass of the roadside, ankle deep
into the fine dust which four weeks of rainless weather had made on the
road, and marched along in it, shuffling his feet viciously until he was
enveloped in a hazy cloud.

"That's the beginning," he announced triumphantly. "And I'm going to
stop in the porch and talk as long as there's anybody there to talk
to. I'm going to squirm and wriggle and whisper, and I'm going to say
I don't know the Golden Text. And I'm going to throw away both of my
collections RIGHT NOW."

And Davy hurled cent and nickel over Mr. Barry's fence with fierce
delight.

"Satan made you do that," said Dora reproachfully.

"He didn't," cried Davy indignantly. "I just thought it out for myself.
And I've thought of something else. I'm not going to Sunday School
or church at all. I'm going up to play with the Cottons. They told me
yesterday they weren't going to Sunday School today, 'cause their mother
was away and there was nobody to make them. Come along, Dora, we'll have
a great time."

"I don't want to go," protested Dora.

"You've got to," said Davy. "If you don't come I'll tell Marilla that
Frank Bell kissed you in school last Monday."

"I couldn't help it. I didn't know he was going to," cried Dora,
blushing scarlet.

"Well, you didn't slap him or seem a bit cross," retorted Davy. "I'll
tell her THAT, too, if you don't come. We'll take the short cut up this
field."

"I'm afraid of those cows," protested poor Dora, seeing a prospect of
escape.

"The very idea of your being scared of those cows," scoffed Davy. "Why,
they're both younger than you."

"They're bigger," said Dora.

"They won't hurt you. Come along, now. This is great. When I grow up
I ain't going to bother going to church at all. I believe I can get to
heaven by myself."

"You'll go to the other place if you break the Sabbath day," said
unhappy Dora, following him sorely against her will.

But Davy was not scared--yet. Hell was very far off, and the delights of
a fishing expedition with the Cottons were very near. He wished Dora
had more spunk. She kept looking back as if she were going to cry every
minute, and that spoiled a fellow's fun. Hang girls, anyway. Davy did
not say "darn" this time, even in thought. He was not sorry--yet--that
he had said it once, but it might be as well not to tempt the Unknown
Powers too far on one day.

The small Cottons were playing in their back yard, and hailed Davy's
appearance with whoops of delight. Pete, Tommy, Adolphus, and Mirabel
Cotton were all alone. Their mother and older sisters were away. Dora
was thankful Mirabel was there, at least. She had been afraid she would
be alone in a crowd of boys. Mirabel was almost as bad as a boy--she was
so noisy and sunburned and reckless. But at least she wore dresses.

"We've come to go fishing," announced Davy.

"Whoop," yelled the Cottons. They rushed away to dig worms at once,
Mirabel leading the van with a tin can. Dora could have sat down and
cried. Oh, if only that hateful Frank Bell had never kissed her! Then
she could have defied Davy, and gone to her beloved Sunday School.

They dared not, of course, go fishing on the pond, where they would be
seen by people going to church. They had to resort to the brook in the
woods behind the Cotton house. But it was full of trout, and they had a
glorious time that morning--at least the Cottons certainly had, and
Davy seemed to have it. Not being entirely bereft of prudence, he had
discarded boots and stockings and borrowed Tommy Cotton's overalls. Thus
accoutered, bog and marsh and undergrowth had no terrors for him. Dora
was frankly and manifestly miserable. She followed the others in their
peregrinations from pool to pool, clasping her Bible and quarterly
tightly and thinking with bitterness of soul of her beloved class where
she should be sitting that very moment, before a teacher she adored.
Instead, here she was roaming the woods with those half-wild Cottons,
trying to keep her boots clean and her pretty white dress free from
rents and stains. Mirabel had offered the loan of an apron but Dora had
scornfully refused.

The trout bit as they always do on Sundays. In an hour the transgressors
had all the fish they wanted, so they returned to the house, much to
Dora's relief. She sat primly on a hencoop in the yard while the others
played an uproarious game of tag; and then they all climbed to the top
of the pig-house roof and cut their initials on the saddleboard. The
flat-roofed henhouse and a pile of straw beneath gave Davy another
inspiration. They spent a splendid half hour climbing on the roof and
diving off into the straw with whoops and yells.

But even unlawful pleasures must come to an end. When the rumble of
wheels over the pond bridge told that people were going home from church
Davy knew they must go. He discarded Tommy's overalls, resumed his own
rightful attire, and turned away from his string of trout with a sigh.
No use to think of taking them home.

"Well, hadn't we a splendid time?" he demanded defiantly, as they went
down the hill field.

"I hadn't," said Dora flatly. "And I don't believe you
had--really--either," she added, with a flash of insight that was not to
be expected of her.

"I had so," cried Davy, but in the voice of one who doth protest too
much. "No wonder you hadn't--just sitting there like a--like a mule."

"I ain't going to, 'sociate with the Cottons," said Dora loftily.

"The Cottons are all right," retorted Davy. "And they have far better
times than we have. They do just as they please and say just what they
like before everybody. _I_'m going to do that, too, after this."

"There are lots of things you wouldn't dare say before everybody,"
averred Dora.

"No, there isn't."

"There is, too. Would you," demanded Dora gravely, "would you say
'tomcat' before the minister?"

This was a staggerer. Davy was not prepared for such a concrete example
of the freedom of speech. But one did not have to be consistent with
Dora.

"Of course not," he admitted sulkily.

"'Tomcat' isn't a holy word. I wouldn't mention such an animal before a
minister at all."

"But if you had to?" persisted Dora.

"I'd call it a Thomas pussy," said Davy.

"_I_ think 'gentleman cat' would be more polite," reflected Dora.

"YOU thinking!" retorted Davy with withering scorn.

Davy was not feeling comfortable, though he would have died before he
admitted it to Dora. Now that the exhilaration of truant delights had
died away, his conscience was beginning to give him salutary twinges.
After all, perhaps it would have been better to have gone to Sunday
School and church. Mrs. Lynde might be bossy; but there was always a
box of cookies in her kitchen cupboard and she was not stingy. At this
inconvenient moment Davy remembered that when he had torn his new school
pants the week before, Mrs. Lynde had mended them beautifully and never
said a word to Marilla about them.

But Davy's cup of iniquity was not yet full. He was to discover that one
sin demands another to cover it. They had dinner with Mrs. Lynde that
day, and the first thing she asked Davy was,

"Were all your class in Sunday School today?"

"Yes'm," said Davy with a gulp. "All were there--'cept one."

"Did you say your Golden Text and catechism?"

"Yes'm."

"Did you put your collection in?"

"Yes'm."

"Was Mrs. Malcolm MacPherson in church?"

"I don't know." This, at least, was the truth, thought wretched Davy.

"Was the Ladies' Aid announced for next week?"

"Yes'm"--quakingly.

"Was prayer-meeting?"

"I--I don't know."

"YOU should know. You should listen more attentively to the
announcements. What was Mr. Harvey's text?"

Davy took a frantic gulp of water and swallowed it and the last protest
of conscience together. He glibly recited an old Golden Text learned
several weeks ago. Fortunately Mrs. Lynde now stopped questioning him;
but Davy did not enjoy his dinner.

He could only eat one helping of pudding.

"What's the matter with you?" demanded justly astonished Mrs. Lynde.
"Are you sick?"

"No," muttered Davy.

"You look pale. You'd better keep out of the sun this afternoon,"
admonished Mrs. Lynde.

"Do you know how many lies you told Mrs. Lynde?" asked Dora
reproachfully, as soon as they were alone after dinner.

Davy, goaded to desperation, turned fiercely.

"I don't know and I don't care," he said. "You just shut up, Dora
Keith."

Then poor Davy betook himself to a secluded retreat behind the woodpile
to think over the way of transgressors.

Green Gables was wrapped in darkness and silence when Anne reached home.
She lost no time going to bed, for she was very tired and sleepy. There
had been several Avonlea jollifications the preceding week, involving
rather late hours. Anne's head was hardly on her pillow before she was
half asleep; but just then her door was softly opened and a pleading
voice said, "Anne."

Anne sat up drowsily.

"Davy, is that you? What is the matter?"

A white-clad figure flung itself across the floor and on to the bed.

"Anne," sobbed Davy, getting his arms about her neck. "I'm awful glad
you're home. I couldn't go to sleep till I'd told somebody."

"Told somebody what?"

"How mis'rubul I am."

"Why are you miserable, dear?"

"'Cause I was so bad today, Anne. Oh, I was awful bad--badder'n I've
ever been yet."

"What did you do?"

"Oh, I'm afraid to tell you. You'll never like me again, Anne. I
couldn't say my prayers tonight. I couldn't tell God what I'd done. I
was 'shamed to have Him know."

"But He knew anyway, Davy."

"That's what Dora said. But I thought p'raps He mightn't have noticed
just at the time. Anyway, I'd rather tell you first."

"WHAT is it you did?"

Out it all came in a rush.

"I run away from Sunday School--and went fishing with the Cottons--and
I told ever so many whoppers to Mrs. Lynde--oh! 'most half a
dozen--and--and--I--I said a swear word, Anne--a pretty near swear word,
anyhow--and I called God names."

There was silence. Davy didn't know what to make of it. Was Anne so
shocked that she never would speak to him again?

"Anne, what are you going to do to me?" he whispered.

"Nothing, dear. You've been punished already, I think."

"No, I haven't. Nothing's been done to me."

"You've been very unhappy ever since you did wrong, haven't you?"

"You bet!" said Davy emphatically.

"That was your conscience punishing you, Davy."

"What's my conscience? I want to know."

"It's something in you, Davy, that always tells you when you are doing
wrong and makes you unhappy if you persist in doing it. Haven't you
noticed that?"

"Yes, but I didn't know what it was. I wish I didn't have it. I'd have
lots more fun. Where is my conscience, Anne? I want to know. Is it in my
stomach?"

"No, it's in your soul," answered Anne, thankful for the darkness, since
gravity must be preserved in serious matters.

"I s'pose I can't get clear of it then," said Davy with a sigh. "Are you
going to tell Marilla and Mrs. Lynde on me, Anne?"

"No, dear, I'm not going to tell any one. You are sorry you were
naughty, aren't you?"

"You bet!"

"And you'll never be bad like that again."

"No, but--" added Davy cautiously, "I might be bad some other way."

"You won't say naughty words, or run away on Sundays, or tell falsehoods
to cover up your sins?"

"No. It doesn't pay," said Davy.

"Well, Davy, just tell God you are sorry and ask Him to forgive you."

"Have YOU forgiven me, Anne?"

"Yes, dear."

"Then," said Davy joyously, "I don't care much whether God does or not."

"Davy!"

"Oh--I'll ask Him--I'll ask Him," said Davy quickly, scrambling off the
bed, convinced by Anne's tone that he must have said something dreadful.
"I don't mind asking Him, Anne.--Please, God, I'm awful sorry I behaved
bad today and I'll try to be good on Sundays always and please forgive
me.--There now, Anne."

"Well, now, run off to bed like a good boy."

"All right. Say, I don't feel mis'rubul any more. I feel fine. Good
night."

"Good night."

Anne slipped down on her pillows with a sigh of relief. Oh--how
sleepy--she was! In another second--

"Anne!" Davy was back again by her bed. Anne dragged her eyes open.

"What is it now, dear?" she asked, trying to keep a note of impatience
out of her voice.

"Anne, have you ever noticed how Mr. Harrison spits? Do you s'pose, if I
practice hard, I can learn to spit just like him?"

Anne sat up.

"Davy Keith," she said, "go straight to your bed and don't let me catch
you out of it again tonight! Go, now!"

Davy went, and stood not upon the order of his going.




Chapter XIV

The Summons


Anne was sitting with Ruby Gillis in the Gillis' garden after the day
had crept lingeringly through it and was gone. It had been a warm, smoky
summer afternoon. The world was in a splendor of out-flowering. The idle
valleys were full of hazes. The woodways were pranked with shadows and
the fields with the purple of the asters.

Anne had given up a moonlight drive to the White Sands beach that she
might spend the evening with Ruby. She had so spent many evenings
that summer, although she often wondered what good it did any one, and
sometimes went home deciding that she could not go again.

Ruby grew paler as the summer waned; the White Sands school was given
up--"her father thought it better that she shouldn't teach till New
Year's"--and the fancy work she loved oftener and oftener fell from
hands grown too weary for it. But she was always gay, always hopeful,
always chattering and whispering of her beaux, and their rivalries and
despairs. It was this that made Anne's visits hard for her. What had
once been silly or amusing was gruesome, now; it was death peering
through a wilful mask of life. Yet Ruby seemed to cling to her, and
never let her go until she had promised to come again soon. Mrs. Lynde
grumbled about Anne's frequent visits, and declared she would catch
consumption; even Marilla was dubious.

"Every time you go to see Ruby you come home looking tired out," she
said.

"It's so very sad and dreadful," said Anne in a low tone. "Ruby doesn't
seem to realize her condition in the least. And yet I somehow feel she
needs help--craves it--and I want to give it to her and can't. All the
time I'm with her I feel as if I were watching her struggle with an
invisible foe--trying to push it back with such feeble resistance as she
has. That is why I come home tired."

But tonight Anne did not feel this so keenly. Ruby was strangely quiet.
She said not a word about parties and drives and dresses and "fellows."
She lay in the hammock, with her untouched work beside her, and a
white shawl wrapped about her thin shoulders. Her long yellow braids of
hair--how Anne had envied those beautiful braids in old schooldays!--lay
on either side of her. She had taken the pins out--they made her head
ache, she said. The hectic flush was gone for the time, leaving her pale
and childlike.

The moon rose in the silvery sky, empearling the clouds around her.
Below, the pond shimmered in its hazy radiance. Just beyond the
Gillis homestead was the church, with the old graveyard beside it. The
moonlight shone on the white stones, bringing them out in clear-cut
relief against the dark trees behind.

"How strange the graveyard looks by moonlight!" said Ruby suddenly.
"How ghostly!" she shuddered. "Anne, it won't be long now before I'll
be lying over there. You and Diana and all the rest will be going about,
full of life--and I'll be there--in the old graveyard--dead!"

The surprise of it bewildered Anne. For a few moments she could not
speak.

"You know it's so, don't you?" said Ruby insistently.

"Yes, I know," answered Anne in a low tone. "Dear Ruby, I know."

"Everybody knows it," said Ruby bitterly. "I know it--I've known it all
summer, though I wouldn't give in. And, oh, Anne"--she reached out and
caught Anne's hand pleadingly, impulsively--"I don't want to die. I'm
AFRAID to die."

"Why should you be afraid, Ruby?" asked Anne quietly.

"Because--because--oh, I'm not afraid but that I'll go to heaven,
Anne. I'm a church member. But--it'll be all so different. I think--and
think--and I get so frightened--and--and--homesick. Heaven must be very
beautiful, of course, the Bible says so--but, Anne, IT WON'T BE WHAT
I'VE BEEN USED TO."

Through Anne's mind drifted an intrusive recollection of a funny story
she had heard Philippa Gordon tell--the story of some old man who had
said very much the same thing about the world to come. It had sounded
funny then--she remembered how she and Priscilla had laughed over it.
But it did not seem in the least humorous now, coming from Ruby's pale,
trembling lips. It was sad, tragic--and true! Heaven could not be what
Ruby had been used to. There had been nothing in her gay, frivolous
life, her shallow ideals and aspirations, to fit her for that great
change, or make the life to come seem to her anything but alien and
unreal and undesirable. Anne wondered helplessly what she could say
that would help her. Could she say anything? "I think, Ruby," she began
hesitatingly--for it was difficult for Anne to speak to any one of the
deepest thoughts of her heart, or the new ideas that had vaguely begun
to shape themselves in her mind, concerning the great mysteries of life
here and hereafter, superseding her old childish conceptions, and it
was hardest of all to speak of them to such as Ruby Gillis--"I think,
perhaps, we have very mistaken ideas about heaven--what it is and what
it holds for us. I don't think it can be so very different from life
here as most people seem to think. I believe we'll just go on living, a
good deal as we live here--and be OURSELVES just the same--only it will
be easier to be good and to--follow the highest. All the hindrances
and perplexities will be taken away, and we shall see clearly. Don't be
afraid, Ruby."

"I can't help it," said Ruby pitifully. "Even if what you say about
heaven is true--and you can't be sure--it may be only that imagination
of yours--it won't be JUST the same. It CAN'T be. I want to go on living
HERE. I'm so young, Anne. I haven't had my life. I've fought so hard to
live--and it isn't any use--I have to die--and leave EVERYTHING I care
for." Anne sat in a pain that was almost intolerable. She could not tell
comforting falsehoods; and all that Ruby said was so horribly true. She
WAS leaving everything she cared for. She had laid up her treasures
on earth only; she had lived solely for the little things of life--the
things that pass--forgetting the great things that go onward into
eternity, bridging the gulf between the two lives and making of death a
mere passing from one dwelling to the other--from twilight to unclouded
day. God would take care of her there--Anne believed--she would
learn--but now it was no wonder her soul clung, in blind helplessness,
to the only things she knew and loved.

Ruby raised herself on her arm and lifted up her bright, beautiful blue
eyes to the moonlit skies.

"I want to live," she said, in a trembling voice. "I want to live
like other girls. I--I want to be married, Anne--and--and--have little
children. You know I always loved babies, Anne. I couldn't say this to
any one but you. I know you understand. And then poor Herb--he--he
loves me and I love him, Anne. The others meant nothing to me, but HE
does--and if I could live I would be his wife and be so happy. Oh, Anne,
it's hard."

Ruby sank back on her pillows and sobbed convulsively. Anne pressed her
hand in an agony of sympathy--silent sympathy, which perhaps helped Ruby
more than broken, imperfect words could have done; for presently she
grew calmer and her sobs ceased.

"I'm glad I've told you this, Anne," she whispered. "It has helped me
just to say it all out. I've wanted to all summer--every time you came.
I wanted to talk it over with you--but I COULDN'T. It seemed as if it
would make death so SURE if I SAID I was going to die, or if any one
else said it or hinted it. I wouldn't say it, or even think it. In the
daytime, when people were around me and everything was cheerful, it
wasn't so hard to keep from thinking of it. But in the night, when I
couldn't sleep--it was so dreadful, Anne. I couldn't get away from
it then. Death just came and stared me in the face, until I got so
frightened I could have screamed.

"But you won't be frightened any more, Ruby, will you? You'll be brave,
and believe that all is going to be well with you."

"I'll try. I'll think over what you have said, and try to believe it.
And you'll come up as often as you can, won't you, Anne?"

"Yes, dear."

"It--it won't be very long now, Anne. I feel sure of that. And I'd
rather have you than any one else. I always liked you best of all the
girls I went to school with. You were never jealous, or mean, like some
of them were. Poor Em White was up to see me yesterday. You remember Em
and I were such chums for three years when we went to school? And then
we quarrelled the time of the school concert. We've never spoken to each
other since. Wasn't it silly? Anything like that seems silly NOW. But
Em and I made up the old quarrel yesterday. She said she'd have spoken
years ago, only she thought I wouldn't. And I never spoke to her
because I was sure she wouldn't speak to me. Isn't it strange how people
misunderstand each other, Anne?"

"Most of the trouble in life comes from misunderstanding, I think," said
Anne. "I must go now, Ruby. It's getting late--and you shouldn't be out
in the damp."

"You'll come up soon again."

"Yes, very soon. And if there's anything I can do to help you I'll be so
glad."

"I know. You HAVE helped me already. Nothing seems quite so dreadful
now. Good night, Anne."

"Good night, dear."

Anne walked home very slowly in the moonlight. The evening had changed
something for her. Life held a different meaning, a deeper purpose.
On the surface it would go on just the same; but the deeps had been
stirred. It must not be with her as with poor butterfly Ruby. When she
came to the end of one life it must not be to face the next with the
shrinking terror of something wholly different--something for which
accustomed thought and ideal and aspiration had unfitted her. The little
things of life, sweet and excellent in their place, must not be the
things lived for; the highest must be sought and followed; the life of
heaven must be begun here on earth.

That good night in the garden was for all time. Anne never saw Ruby in
life again. The next night the A.V.I.S. gave a farewell party to Jane
Andrews before her departure for the West. And, while light feet danced
and bright eyes laughed and merry tongues chattered, there came a
summons to a soul in Avonlea that might not be disregarded or evaded.
The next morning the word went from house to house that Ruby Gillis was
dead. She had died in her sleep, painlessly and calmly, and on her face
was a smile--as if, after all, death had come as a kindly friend to lead
her over the threshold, instead of the grisly phantom she had dreaded.

Mrs. Rachel Lynde said emphatically after the funeral that Ruby Gillis
was the handsomest corpse she ever laid eyes on. Her loveliness, as she
lay, white-clad, among the delicate flowers that Anne had placed about
her, was remembered and talked of for years in Avonlea. Ruby had always
been beautiful; but her beauty had been of the earth, earthy; it had
had a certain insolent quality in it, as if it flaunted itself in the
beholder's eye; spirit had never shone through it, intellect had never
refined it. But death had touched it and consecrated it, bringing out
delicate modelings and purity of outline never seen before--doing what
life and love and great sorrow and deep womanhood joys might have
done for Ruby. Anne, looking down through a mist of tears, at her old
playfellow, thought she saw the face God had meant Ruby to have, and
remembered it so always.

Mrs. Gillis called Anne aside into a vacant room before the funeral
procession left the house, and gave her a small packet.

"I want you to have this," she sobbed. "Ruby would have liked you to
have it. It's the embroidered centerpiece she was working at. It isn't
quite finished--the needle is sticking in it just where her poor little
fingers put it the last time she laid it down, the afternoon before she
died."

"There's always a piece of unfinished work left," said Mrs. Lynde, with
tears in her eyes. "But I suppose there's always some one to finish it."

"How difficult it is to realize that one we have always known can really
be dead," said Anne, as she and Diana walked home. "Ruby is the first of
our schoolmates to go. One by one, sooner or later, all the rest of us
must follow."

"Yes, I suppose so," said Diana uncomfortably. She did not want to talk
of that. She would have preferred to have discussed the details of the
funeral--the splendid white velvet casket Mr. Gillis had insisted on
having for Ruby--"the Gillises must always make a splurge, even at
funerals," quoth Mrs. Rachel Lynde--Herb Spencer's sad face, the
uncontrolled, hysteric grief of one of Ruby's sisters--but Anne would
not talk of these things. She seemed wrapped in a reverie in which Diana
felt lonesomely that she had neither lot nor part.

"Ruby Gillis was a great girl to laugh," said Davy suddenly. "Will she
laugh as much in heaven as she did in Avonlea, Anne? I want to know."

"Yes, I think she will," said Anne.

"Oh, Anne," protested Diana, with a rather shocked smile.

"Well, why not, Diana?" asked Anne seriously. "Do you think we'll never
laugh in heaven?"

"Oh--I--I don't know" floundered Diana. "It doesn't seem just right,
somehow. You know it's rather dreadful to laugh in church."

"But heaven won't be like church--all the time," said Anne.

"I hope it ain't," said Davy emphatically. "If it is I don't want to
go. Church is awful dull. Anyway, I don't mean to go for ever so long. I
mean to live to be a hundred years old, like Mr. Thomas Blewett of White
Sands. He says he's lived so long 'cause he always smoked tobacco and it
killed all the germs. Can I smoke tobacco pretty soon, Anne?"

"No, Davy, I hope you'll never use tobacco," said Anne absently.

"What'll you feel like if the germs kill me then?" demanded Davy.




Chapter XV

A Dream Turned Upside Down


"Just one more week and we go back to Redmond," said Anne. She was
happy at the thought of returning to work, classes and Redmond friends.
Pleasing visions were also being woven around Patty's Place. There was
a warm pleasant sense of home in the thought of it, even though she had
never lived there.

But the summer had been a very happy one, too--a time of glad living
with summer suns and skies, a time of keen delight in wholesome things;
a time of renewing and deepening of old friendships; a time in which
she had learned to live more nobly, to work more patiently, to play more
heartily.

"All life lessons are not learned at college," she thought. "Life
teaches them everywhere."

But alas, the final week of that pleasant vacation was spoiled for Anne,
by one of those impish happenings which are like a dream turned upside
down.

"Been writing any more stories lately?" inquired Mr. Harrison genially
one evening when Anne was taking tea with him and Mrs. Harrison.

"No," answered Anne, rather crisply.

"Well, no offense meant. Mrs. Hiram Sloane told me the other day that a
big envelope addressed to the Rollings Reliable Baking Powder Company of
Montreal had been dropped into the post office box a month ago, and she
suspicioned that somebody was trying for the prize they'd offered for
the best story that introduced the name of their baking powder. She said
it wasn't addressed in your writing, but I thought maybe it was you."

"Indeed, no! I saw the prize offer, but I'd never dream of competing
for it. I think it would be perfectly disgraceful to write a story to
advertise a baking powder. It would be almost as bad as Judson Parker's
patent medicine fence."

So spake Anne loftily, little dreaming of the valley of humiliation
awaiting her. That very evening Diana popped into the porch gable,
bright-eyed and rosy cheeked, carrying a letter.

"Oh, Anne, here's a letter for you. I was at the office, so I thought
I'd bring it along. Do open it quick. If it is what I believe it is I
shall just be wild with delight." Anne, puzzled, opened the letter and
glanced over the typewritten contents.


Miss Anne Shirley,

Green Gables,

Avonlea, P.E. Island.

"DEAR MADAM: We have much pleasure in informing you that your charming
story 'Averil's Atonement' has won the prize of twenty-five dollars
offered in our recent competition. We enclose the check herewith. We are
arranging for the publication of the story in several prominent Canadian
newspapers, and we also intend to have it printed in pamphlet form for
distribution among our patrons. Thanking you for the interest you have
shown in our enterprise, we remain,

"Yours very truly,

"THE ROLLINGS RELIABLE

"BAKING POWDER Co."


"I don't understand," said Anne, blankly.

Diana clapped her hands.

"Oh, I KNEW it would win the prize--I was sure of it. _I_ sent your
story into the competition, Anne."

"Diana--Barry!"

"Yes, I did," said Diana gleefully, perching herself on the bed. "When
I saw the offer I thought of your story in a minute, and at first
I thought I'd ask you to send it in. But then I was afraid you
wouldn't--you had so little faith left in it. So I just decided I'd send
the copy you gave me, and say nothing about it. Then, if it didn't win
the prize, you'd never know and you wouldn't feel badly over it, because
the stories that failed were not to be returned, and if it did you'd
have such a delightful surprise."

Diana was not the most discerning of mortals, but just at this moment it
struck her that Anne was not looking exactly overjoyed. The surprise was
there, beyond doubt--but where was the delight?

"Why, Anne, you don't seem a bit pleased!" she exclaimed.

Anne instantly manufactured a smile and put it on.

"Of course I couldn't be anything but pleased over your unselfish wish
to give me pleasure," she said slowly. "But you know--I'm so amazed--I
can't realize it--and I don't understand. There wasn't a word in my
story about--about--" Anne choked a little over the word--"baking
powder."

"Oh, _I_ put that in," said Diana, reassured. "It was as easy as
wink--and of course my experience in our old Story Club helped me. You
know the scene where Averil makes the cake? Well, I just stated that
she used the Rollings Reliable in it, and that was why it turned out so
well; and then, in the last paragraph, where PERCEVAL clasps AVERIL in
his arms and says, 'Sweetheart, the beautiful coming years will bring us
the fulfilment of our home of dreams,' I added, 'in which we will never
use any baking powder except Rollings Reliable.'"

"Oh," gasped poor Anne, as if some one had dashed cold water on her.

"And you've won the twenty-five dollars," continued Diana jubilantly.
"Why, I heard Priscilla say once that the Canadian Woman only pays five
dollars for a story!"

Anne held out the hateful pink slip in shaking fingers.

"I can't take it--it's yours by right, Diana. You sent the story in and
made the alterations. I--I would certainly never have sent it. So you
must take the check."

"I'd like to see myself," said Diana scornfully. "Why, what I did wasn't
any trouble. The honor of being a friend of the prizewinner is enough
for me. Well, I must go. I should have gone straight home from the post
office for we have company. But I simply had to come and hear the news.
I'm so glad for your sake, Anne."

Anne suddenly bent forward, put her arms about Diana, and kissed her
cheek.

"I think you are the sweetest and truest friend in the world, Diana,"
she said, with a little tremble in her voice, "and I assure you I
appreciate the motive of what you've done."

Diana, pleased and embarrassed, got herself away, and poor Anne,
after flinging the innocent check into her bureau drawer as if it
were blood-money, cast herself on her bed and wept tears of shame and
outraged sensibility. Oh, she could never live this down--never!

Gilbert arrived at dusk, brimming over with congratulations, for he had
called at Orchard Slope and heard the news. But his congratulations died
on his lips at sight of Anne's face.

"Why, Anne, what is the matter? I expected to find you radiant over
winning Rollings Reliable prize. Good for you!"

"Oh, Gilbert, not you," implored Anne, in an ET-TU BRUTE tone. "I
thought YOU would understand. Can't you see how awful it is?"

"I must confess I can't. WHAT is wrong?"

"Everything," moaned Anne. "I feel as if I were disgraced forever. What
do you think a mother would feel like if she found her child tattooed
over with a baking powder advertisement? I feel just the same. I loved
my poor little story, and I wrote it out of the best that was in me.
And it is SACRILEGE to have it degraded to the level of a baking powder
advertisement. Don't you remember what Professor Hamilton used to tell
us in the literature class at Queen's? He said we were never to write
a word for a low or unworthy motive, but always to cling to the very
highest ideals. What will he think when he hears I've written a story to
advertise Rollings Reliable? And, oh, when it gets out at Redmond! Think
how I'll be teased and laughed at!"

"That you won't," said Gilbert, wondering uneasily if it were that
confounded Junior's opinion in particular over which Anne was worried.
"The Reds will think just as I thought--that you, being like nine out of
ten of us, not overburdened with worldly wealth, had taken this way of
earning an honest penny to help yourself through the year. I don't see
that there's anything low or unworthy about that, or anything ridiculous
either. One would rather write masterpieces of literature no doubt--but
meanwhile board and tuition fees have to be paid."

This commonsense, matter-of-fact view of the case cheered Anne a little.
At least it removed her dread of being laughed at, though the deeper
hurt of an outraged ideal remained.




Chapter XVI

Adjusted Relationships


"It's the homiest spot I ever saw--it's homier than home," avowed
Philippa Gordon, looking about her with delighted eyes. They were all
assembled at twilight in the big living-room at Patty's Place--Anne and
Priscilla, Phil and Stella, Aunt Jamesina, Rusty, Joseph, the Sarah-Cat,
and Gog and Magog. The firelight shadows were dancing over the walls;
the cats were purring; and a huge bowl of hothouse chrysanthemums,
sent to Phil by one of the victims, shone through the golden gloom like
creamy moons.

It was three weeks since they had considered themselves settled, and
already all believed the experiment would be a success. The first
fortnight after their return had been a pleasantly exciting one; they
had been busy setting up their household goods, organizing their little
establishment, and adjusting different opinions.

Anne was not over-sorry to leave Avonlea when the time came to return
to college. The last few days of her vacation had not been pleasant.
Her prize story had been published in the Island papers; and Mr. William
Blair had, upon the counter of his store, a huge pile of pink, green and
yellow pamphlets, containing it, one of which he gave to every customer.
He sent a complimentary bundle to Anne, who promptly dropped them all in
the kitchen stove. Her humiliation was the consequence of her own ideals
only, for Avonlea folks thought it quite splendid that she should have
won the prize. Her many friends regarded her with honest admiration; her
few foes with scornful envy. Josie Pye said she believed Anne Shirley
had just copied the story; she was sure she remembered reading it in
a paper years before. The Sloanes, who had found out or guessed that
Charlie had been "turned down," said they didn't think it was much to be
proud of; almost any one could have done it, if she tried. Aunt Atossa
told Anne she was very sorry to hear she had taken to writing novels;
nobody born and bred in Avonlea would do it; that was what came of
adopting orphans from goodness knew where, with goodness knew what
kind of parents. Even Mrs. Rachel Lynde was darkly dubious about the
propriety of writing fiction, though she was almost reconciled to it by
that twenty-five dollar check.

"It is perfectly amazing, the price they pay for such lies, that's
what," she said, half-proudly, half-severely.

All things considered, it was a relief when going-away time came. And
it was very jolly to be back at Redmond, a wise, experienced Soph with
hosts of friends to greet on the merry opening day. Pris and Stella and
Gilbert were there, Charlie Sloane, looking more important than ever a
Sophomore looked before, Phil, with the Alec-and-Alonzo question still
unsettled, and Moody Spurgeon MacPherson. Moody Spurgeon had been
teaching school ever since leaving Queen's, but his mother had concluded
it was high time he gave it up and turned his attention to learning
how to be a minister. Poor Moody Spurgeon fell on hard luck at the very
beginning of his college career. Half a dozen ruthless Sophs, who were
among his fellow-boarders, swooped down upon him one night and shaved
half of his head. In this guise the luckless Moody Spurgeon had to go
about until his hair grew again. He told Anne bitterly that there were
times when he had his doubts as to whether he was really called to be a
minister.

Aunt Jamesina did not come until the girls had Patty's Place ready for
her. Miss Patty had sent the key to Anne, with a letter in which she
said Gog and Magog were packed in a box under the spare-room bed, but
might be taken out when wanted; in a postscript she added that she hoped
the girls would be careful about putting up pictures. The living room
had been newly papered five years before and she and Miss Maria did
not want any more holes made in that new paper than was absolutely
necessary. For the rest she trusted everything to Anne.

How those girls enjoyed putting their nest in order! As Phil said, it
was almost as good as getting married. You had the fun of homemaking
without the bother of a husband. All brought something with them to
adorn or make comfortable the little house. Pris and Phil and Stella had
knick-knacks and pictures galore, which latter they proceeded to hang
according to taste, in reckless disregard of Miss Patty's new paper.

"We'll putty the holes up when we leave, dear--she'll never know," they
said to protesting Anne.

Diana had given Anne a pine needle cushion and Miss Ada had given both
her and Priscilla a fearfully and wonderfully embroidered one. Marilla
had sent a big box of preserves, and darkly hinted at a hamper for
Thanksgiving, and Mrs. Lynde gave Anne a patchwork quilt and loaned her
five more.

"You take them," she said authoritatively. "They might as well be in use
as packed away in that trunk in the garret for moths to gnaw."

No moths would ever have ventured near those quilts, for they reeked of
mothballs to such an extent that they had to be hung in the orchard of
Patty's Place a full fortnight before they could be endured indoors.
Verily, aristocratic Spofford Avenue had rarely beheld such a display.
The gruff old millionaire who lived "next door" came over and wanted to
buy the gorgeous red and yellow "tulip-pattern" one which Mrs. Rachel
had given Anne. He said his mother used to make quilts like that, and by
Jove, he wanted one to remind him of her. Anne would not sell it, much
to his disappointment, but she wrote all about it to Mrs. Lynde. That
highly-gratified lady sent word back that she had one just like it to
spare, so the tobacco king got his quilt after all, and insisted on
having it spread on his bed, to the disgust of his fashionable wife.

Mrs. Lynde's quilts served a very useful purpose that winter. Patty's
Place for all its many virtues, had its faults also. It was really a
rather cold house; and when the frosty nights came the girls were very
glad to snuggle down under Mrs. Lynde's quilts, and hoped that the loan
of them might be accounted unto her for righteousness. Anne had the blue
room she had coveted at sight. Priscilla and Stella had the large one.
Phil was blissfully content with the little one over the kitchen; and
Aunt Jamesina was to have the downstairs one off the living-room. Rusty
at first slept on the doorstep.

Anne, walking home from Redmond a few days after her return, became
aware that the people that she met surveyed her with a covert, indulgent
smile. Anne wondered uneasily what was the matter with her. Was her hat
crooked? Was her belt loose? Craning her head to investigate, Anne, for
the first time, saw Rusty.

Trotting along behind her, close to her heels, was quite the most
forlorn specimen of the cat tribe she had ever beheld. The animal was
well past kitten-hood, lank, thin, disreputable looking. Pieces of both
ears were lacking, one eye was temporarily out of repair, and one jowl
ludicrously swollen. As for color, if a once black cat had been well and
thoroughly singed the result would have resembled the hue of this waif's
thin, draggled, unsightly fur.

Anne "shooed," but the cat would not "shoo." As long as she stood he sat
back on his haunches and gazed at her reproachfully out of his one good
eye; when she resumed her walk he followed. Anne resigned herself to his
company until she reached the gate of Patty's Place, which she coldly
shut in his face, fondly supposing she had seen the last of him.
But when, fifteen minutes later, Phil opened the door, there sat the
rusty-brown cat on the step. More, he promptly darted in and sprang upon
Anne's lap with a half-pleading, half-triumphant "miaow."

"Anne," said Stella severely, "do you own that animal?"

"No, I do NOT," protested disgusted Anne. "The creature followed me home
from somewhere. I couldn't get rid of him. Ugh, get down. I like decent
cats reasonably well; but I don't like beasties of your complexion."

Pussy, however, refused to get down. He coolly curled up in Anne's lap
and began to purr.

"He has evidently adopted you," laughed Priscilla.

"I won't BE adopted," said Anne stubbornly.

"The poor creature is starving," said Phil pityingly. "Why, his bones
are almost coming through his skin."

"Well, I'll give him a square meal and then he must return to whence he
came," said Anne resolutely.

The cat was fed and put out. In the morning he was still on the
doorstep. On the doorstep he continued to sit, bolting in whenever the
door was opened. No coolness of welcome had the least effect on him;
of nobody save Anne did he take the least notice. Out of compassion the
girls fed him; but when a week had passed they decided that something
must be done. The cat's appearance had improved. His eye and cheek had
resumed their normal appearance; he was not quite so thin; and he had
been seen washing his face.

"But for all that we can't keep him," said Stella. "Aunt Jimsie is
coming next week and she will bring the Sarah-cat with her. We can't
keep two cats; and if we did this Rusty Coat would fight all the time
with the Sarah-cat. He's a fighter by nature. He had a pitched battle
last evening with the tobacco-king's cat and routed him, horse, foot and
artillery."

"We must get rid of him," agreed Anne, looking darkly at the subject
of their discussion, who was purring on the hearth rug with an air of
lamb-like meekness. "But the question is--how? How can four unprotected
females get rid of a cat who won't be got rid of?"

"We must chloroform him," said Phil briskly. "That is the most humane
way."

"Who of us knows anything about chloroforming a cat?" demanded Anne
gloomily.

"I do, honey. It's one of my few--sadly few--useful accomplishments.
I've disposed of several at home. You take the cat in the morning and
give him a good breakfast. Then you take an old burlap bag--there's one
in the back porch--put the cat on it and turn over him a wooden box.
Then take a two-ounce bottle of chloroform, uncork it, and slip it under
the edge of the box. Put a heavy weight on top of the box and leave it
till evening. The cat will be dead, curled up peacefully as if he were
asleep. No pain--no struggle."

"It sounds easy," said Anne dubiously.

"It IS easy. Just leave it to me. I'll see to it," said Phil
reassuringly.

Accordingly the chloroform was procured, and the next morning Rusty was
lured to his doom. He ate his breakfast, licked his chops, and climbed
into Anne's lap. Anne's heart misgave her. This poor creature loved
her--trusted her. How could she be a party to this destruction?

"Here, take him," she said hastily to Phil. "I feel like a murderess."

"He won't suffer, you know," comforted Phil, but Anne had fled.

The fatal deed was done in the back porch. Nobody went near it that day.
But at dusk Phil declared that Rusty must be buried.

"Pris and Stella must dig his grave in the orchard," declared Phil, "and
Anne must come with me to lift the box off. That's the part I always
hate."

The two conspirators tip-toed reluctantly to the back porch. Phil
gingerly lifted the stone she had put on the box. Suddenly, faint but
distinct, sounded an unmistakable mew under the box.

"He--he isn't dead," gasped Anne, sitting blankly down on the kitchen
doorstep.

"He must be," said Phil incredulously.

Another tiny mew proved that he wasn't. The two girls stared at each
other.

"What will we do?" questioned Anne.

"Why in the world don't you come?" demanded Stella, appearing in the
doorway. "We've got the grave ready. 'What silent still and silent
all?'" she quoted teasingly.

"'Oh, no, the voices of the dead Sound like the distant torrent's
fall,'" promptly counter-quoted Anne, pointing solemnly to the box.

A burst of laughter broke the tension.

"We must leave him here till morning," said Phil, replacing the stone.
"He hasn't mewed for five minutes. Perhaps the mews we heard were his
dying groan. Or perhaps we merely imagined them, under the strain of our
guilty consciences."

But, when the box was lifted in the morning, Rusty bounded at one gay
leap to Anne's shoulder where he began to lick her face affectionately.
Never was there a cat more decidedly alive.

"Here's a knot hole in the box," groaned Phil. "I never saw it. That's
why he didn't die. Now, we've got to do it all over again."

"No, we haven't," declared Anne suddenly. "Rusty isn't going to be
killed again. He's my cat--and you've just got to make the best of it."

"Oh, well, if you'll settle with Aunt Jimsie and the Sarah-cat," said
Stella, with the air of one washing her hands of the whole affair.

From that time Rusty was one of the family. He slept o'nights on the
scrubbing cushion in the back porch and lived on the fat of the land.
By the time Aunt Jamesina came he was plump and glossy and tolerably
respectable. But, like Kipling's cat, he "walked by himself." His paw
was against every cat, and every cat's paw against him. One by one he
vanquished the aristocratic felines of Spofford Avenue. As for human
beings, he loved Anne and Anne alone. Nobody else even dared stroke
him. An angry spit and something that sounded much like very improper
language greeted any one who did.

"The airs that cat puts on are perfectly intolerable," declared Stella.

"Him was a nice old pussens, him was," vowed Anne, cuddling her pet
defiantly.

"Well, I don't know how he and the Sarah-cat will ever make out to
live together," said Stella pesimistically. "Cat-fights in the orchard
o'nights are bad enough. But cat-fights here in the livingroom are
unthinkable." In due time Aunt Jamesina arrived. Anne and Priscilla and
Phil had awaited her advent rather dubiously; but when Aunt Jamesina was
enthroned in the rocking chair before the open fire they figuratively
bowed down and worshipped her.

Aunt Jamesina was a tiny old woman with a little, softly-triangular
face, and large, soft blue eyes that were alight with unquenchable
youth, and as full of hopes as a girl's. She had pink cheeks and
snow-white hair which she wore in quaint little puffs over her ears.

"It's a very old-fashioned way," she said, knitting industriously
at something as dainty and pink as a sunset cloud. "But _I_ am
old-fashioned. My clothes are, and it stands to reason my opinions are,
too. I don't say they're any the better of that, mind you. In fact, I
daresay they're a good deal the worse. But they've worn nice and
easy. New shoes are smarter than old ones, but the old ones are more
comfortable. I'm old enough to indulge myself in the matter of shoes and
opinions. I mean to take it real easy here. I know you expect me to look
after you and keep you proper, but I'm not going to do it. You're old
enough to know how to behave if you're ever going to be. So, as far as I
am concerned," concluded Aunt Jamesina, with a twinkle in her young
eyes, "you can all go to destruction in your own way."

"Oh, will somebody separate those cats?" pleaded Stella, shudderingly.

Aunt Jamesina had brought with her not only the Sarah-cat but Joseph.
Joseph, she explained, had belonged to a dear friend of hers who had
gone to live in Vancouver.

"She couldn't take Joseph with her so she begged me to take him. I
really couldn't refuse. He's a beautiful cat--that is, his disposition
is beautiful. She called him Joseph because his coat is of many colors."

It certainly was. Joseph, as the disgusted Stella said, looked like a
walking rag-bag. It was impossible to say what his ground color was. His
legs were white with black spots on them. His back was gray with a huge
patch of yellow on one side and a black patch on the other. His tail was
yellow with a gray tip. One ear was black and one yellow. A black patch
over one eye gave him a fearfully rakish look. In reality he was meek
and inoffensive, of a sociable disposition. In one respect, if in no
other, Joseph was like a lily of the field. He toiled not neither did
he spin or catch mice. Yet Solomon in all his glory slept not on softer
cushions, or feasted more fully on fat things.

Joseph and the Sarah-cat arrived by express in separate boxes. After
they had been released and fed, Joseph selected the cushion and corner
which appealed to him, and the Sarah-cat gravely sat herself down
before the fire and proceeded to wash her face. She was a large, sleek,
gray-and-white cat, with an enormous dignity which was not at all
impaired by any consciousness of her plebian origin. She had been given
to Aunt Jamesina by her washerwoman.

"Her name was Sarah, so my husband always called puss the Sarah-cat,"
explained Aunt Jamesina. "She is eight years old, and a remarkable
mouser. Don't worry, Stella. The Sarah-cat NEVER fights and Joseph
rarely."

"They'll have to fight here in self-defense," said Stella.

At this juncture Rusty arrived on the scene. He bounded joyously half
way across the room before he saw the intruders. Then he stopped short;
his tail expanded until it was as big as three tails. The fur on his
back rose up in a defiant arch; Rusty lowered his head, uttered a
fearful shriek of hatred and defiance, and launched himself at the
Sarah-cat.

The stately animal had stopped washing her face and was looking at him
curiously. She met his onslaught with one contemptuous sweep of her
capable paw. Rusty went rolling helplessly over on the rug; he picked
himself up dazedly. What sort of a cat was this who had boxed his ears?
He looked dubiously at the Sarah-cat. Would he or would he not? The
Sarah-cat deliberately turned her back on him and resumed her toilet
operations. Rusty decided that he would not. He never did. From that
time on the Sarah-cat ruled the roost. Rusty never again interfered with
her.

But Joseph rashly sat up and yawned. Rusty, burning to avenge his
disgrace, swooped down upon him. Joseph, pacific by nature, could fight
upon occasion and fight well. The result was a series of drawn battles.
Every day Rusty and Joseph fought at sight. Anne took Rusty's part and
detested Joseph. Stella was in despair. But Aunt Jamesina only laughed.

"Let them fight it out," she said tolerantly. "They'll make friends after
a bit. Joseph needs some exercise--he was getting too fat. And Rusty has
to learn he isn't the only cat in the world."

Eventually Joseph and Rusty accepted the situation and from sworn
enemies became sworn friends. They slept on the same cushion with their
paws about each other, and gravely washed each other's faces.

"We've all got used to each other," said Phil. "And I've learned how to
wash dishes and sweep a floor."

"But you needn't try to make us believe you can chloroform a cat,"
laughed Anne.

"It was all the fault of the knothole," protested Phil.

"It was a good thing the knothole was there," said Aunt Jamesina rather
severely. "Kittens HAVE to be drowned, I admit, or the world would be
overrun. But no decent, grown-up cat should be done to death--unless he
sucks eggs."

"You wouldn't have thought Rusty very decent if you'd seen him when he
came here," said Stella. "He positively looked like the Old Nick."

"I don't believe Old Nick can be so very, ugly" said Aunt Jamesina
reflectively. "He wouldn't do so much harm if he was. _I_ always think
of him as a rather handsome gentleman."




Chapter XVII

A Letter from Davy


"It's beginning to snow, girls," said Phil, coming in one November
evening, "and there are the loveliest little stars and crosses all over
the garden walk. I never noticed before what exquisite things snowflakes
really are. One has time to notice things like that in the simple life.
Bless you all for permitting me to live it. It's really delightful to
feel worried because butter has gone up five cents a pound."

"Has it?" demanded Stella, who kept the household accounts.

"It has--and here's your butter. I'm getting quite expert at marketing.
It's better fun than flirting," concluded Phil gravely.

"Everything is going up scandalously," sighed Stella.

"Never mind. Thank goodness air and salvation are still free," said Aunt
Jamesina.

"And so is laughter," added Anne. "There's no tax on it yet and that is
well, because you're all going to laugh presently. I'm going to read
you Davy's letter. His spelling has improved immensely this past year,
though he is not strong on apostrophes, and he certainly possesses
the gift of writing an interesting letter. Listen and laugh, before we
settle down to the evening's study-grind."

"Dear Anne," ran Davy's letter, "I take my pen to tell you that we are
all pretty well and hope this will find you the same. It's snowing some
today and Marilla says the old woman in the sky is shaking her feather
beds. Is the old woman in the sky God's wife, Anne? I want to know.

"Mrs. Lynde has been real sick but she is better now. She fell down the
cellar stairs last week. When she fell she grabbed hold of the shelf
with all the milk pails and stewpans on it, and it gave way and went
down with her and made a splendid crash. Marilla thought it was an
earthquake at first.

"One of the stewpans was all dinged up and Mrs. Lynde straned her ribs.
The doctor came and gave her medicine to rub on her ribs but she didn't
under stand him and took it all inside instead. The doctor said it was
a wonder it dident kill her but it dident and it cured her ribs and Mrs.
Lynde says doctors dont know much anyhow. But we couldent fix up the
stewpan. Marilla had to throw it out. Thanksgiving was last week. There
was no school and we had a great dinner. I et mince pie and rost turkey
and frut cake and donuts and cheese and jam and choklut cake. Marilla
said I'd die but I dident. Dora had earake after it, only it wasent in
her ears it was in her stummick. I dident have earake anywhere.

"Our new teacher is a man. He does things for jokes. Last week he made
all us third-class boys write a composishun on what kind of a wife we'd
like to have and the girls on what kind of a husband. He laughed fit to
kill when he read them. This was mine. I thought youd like to see it.

"'The kind of a wife I'd like to Have.

"'She must have good manners and get my meals on time and do what I tell
her and always be very polite to me. She must be fifteen yers old. She
must be good to the poor and keep her house tidy and be good tempered
and go to church regularly. She must be very handsome and have curly
hair. If I get a wife that is just what I like Ill be an awful good
husband to her. I think a woman ought to be awful good to her husband.
Some poor women haven't any husbands.

"'THE END.'"


"I was at Mrs. Isaac Wrights funeral at White Sands last week. The
husband of the corpse felt real sorry. Mrs. Lynde says Mrs. Wrights
grandfather stole a sheep but Marilla says we mustent speak ill of the
dead. Why mustent we, Anne? I want to know. It's pretty safe, ain't it?

"Mrs. Lynde was awful mad the other day because I asked her if she was
alive in Noah's time. I dident mean to hurt her feelings. I just wanted
to know. Was she, Anne?

"Mr. Harrison wanted to get rid of his dog. So he hunged him once but he
come to life and scooted for the barn while Mr. Harrison was digging the
grave, so he hunged him again and he stayed dead that time. Mr. Harrison
has a new man working for him. He's awful okward. Mr. Harrison says he
is left handed in both his feet. Mr. Barry's hired man is lazy. Mrs.
Barry says that but Mr. Barry says he aint lazy exactly only he thinks
it easier to pray for things than to work for them.

"Mrs. Harmon Andrews prize pig that she talked so much of died in a fit.
Mrs. Lynde says it was a judgment on her for pride. But I think it
was hard on the pig. Milty Boulter has been sick. The doctor gave
him medicine and it tasted horrid. I offered to take it for him for a
quarter but the Boulters are so mean. Milty says he'd rather take it
himself and save his money. I asked Mrs. Boulter how a person would go
about catching a man and she got awful mad and said she dident know,
shed never chased men.

"The A.V.I.S. is going to paint the hall again. They're tired of having
it blue.

"The new minister was here to tea last night. He took three pieces of
pie. If I did that Mrs. Lynde would call me piggy. And he et fast and
took big bites and Marilla is always telling me not to do that. Why can
ministers do what boys can't? I want to know.

"I haven't any more news. Here are six kisses. xxxxxx. Dora sends one.
Heres hers. x.

"Your loving friend DAVID KEITH"


"P.S. Anne, who was the devils father? I want to know."




Chapter XVIII

Miss Josephine Remembers the Anne-girl


When Christmas holidays came the girls of Patty's Place scattered to
their respective homes, but Aunt Jamesina elected to stay where she was.

"I couldn't go to any of the places I've been invited and take those
three cats," she said. "And I'm not going to leave the poor creatures
here alone for nearly three weeks. If we had any decent neighbors who
would feed them I might, but there's nothing except millionaires on this
street. So I'll stay here and keep Patty's Place warm for you."

Anne went home with the usual joyous anticipations--which were not
wholly fulfilled. She found Avonlea in the grip of such an early, cold,
and stormy winter as even the "oldest inhabitant" could not recall.
Green Gables was literally hemmed in by huge drifts. Almost every day of
that ill-starred vacation it stormed fiercely; and even on fine days it
drifted unceasingly. No sooner were the roads broken than they filled
in again. It was almost impossible to stir out. The A.V.I.S. tried, on
three evenings, to have a party in honor of the college students, and on
each evening the storm was so wild that nobody could go, so they gave up
the attempt in despair. Anne, despite her love of and loyalty to Green
Gables, could not help thinking longingly of Patty's Place, its cosy
open fire, Aunt Jamesina's mirthful eyes, the three cats, the merry
chatter of the girls, the pleasantness of Friday evenings when college
friends dropped in to talk of grave and gay.

Anne was lonely; Diana, during the whole of the holidays, was imprisoned
at home with a bad attack of bronchitis. She could not come to Green
Gables and it was rarely Anne could get to Orchard Slope, for the old
way through the Haunted Wood was impassable with drifts, and the long
way over the frozen Lake of Shining Waters was almost as bad. Ruby
Gillis was sleeping in the white-heaped graveyard; Jane Andrews was
teaching a school on western prairies. Gilbert, to be sure, was still
faithful, and waded up to Green Gables every possible evening. But
Gilbert's visits were not what they once were. Anne almost dreaded them.
It was very disconcerting to look up in the midst of a sudden silence
and find Gilbert's hazel eyes fixed upon her with a quite unmistakable
expression in their grave depths; and it was still more disconcerting
to find herself blushing hotly and uncomfortably under his gaze, just as
if--just as if--well, it was very embarrassing. Anne wished herself back
at Patty's Place, where there was always somebody else about to take the
edge off a delicate situation. At Green Gables Marilla went promptly to
Mrs. Lynde's domain when Gilbert came and insisted on taking the twins
with her. The significance of this was unmistakable and Anne was in a
helpless fury over it.

Davy, however, was perfectly happy. He reveled in getting out in the
morning and shoveling out the paths to the well and henhouse. He gloried
in the Christmas-tide delicacies which Marilla and Mrs. Lynde vied with
each other in preparing for Anne, and he was reading an enthralling
tale, in a school library book, of a wonderful hero who seemed blessed
with a miraculous faculty for getting into scrapes from which he was
usually delivered by an earthquake or a volcanic explosion, which blew
him high and dry out of his troubles, landed him in a fortune, and
closed the story with proper ECLAT.

"I tell you it's a bully story, Anne," he said ecstatically. "I'd ever
so much rather read it than the Bible."

"Would you?" smiled Anne.

Davy peered curiously at her.

"You don't seem a bit shocked, Anne. Mrs. Lynde was awful shocked when I
said it to her."

"No, I'm not shocked, Davy. I think it's quite natural that a
nine-year-old boy would sooner read an adventure story than the Bible.
But when you are older I hope and think that you will realize what a
wonderful book the Bible is."

"Oh, I think some parts of it are fine," conceded Davy. "That story
about Joseph now--it's bully. But if I'd been Joseph _I_ wouldn't have
forgive the brothers. No, siree, Anne. I'd have cut all their heads off.
Mrs. Lynde was awful mad when I said that and shut the Bible up and said
she'd never read me any more of it if I talked like that. So I don't
talk now when she reads it Sunday afternoons; I just think things and
say them to Milty Boulter next day in school. I told Milty the story
about Elisha and the bears and it scared him so he's never made fun of
Mr. Harrison's bald head once. Are there any bears on P.E. Island, Anne?
I want to know."

"Not nowadays," said Anne, absently, as the wind blew a scud of snow
against the window. "Oh, dear, will it ever stop storming."

"God knows," said Davy airily, preparing to resume his reading.

Anne WAS shocked this time.

"Davy!" she exclaimed reproachfully.

"Mrs. Lynde says that," protested Davy. "One night last week Marilla
said 'Will Ludovic Speed and Theodora Dix EVER get married?" and Mrs.
Lynde said, "'God knows'--just like that."

"Well, it wasn't right for her to say it," said Anne, promptly deciding
upon which horn of this dilemma to empale herself. "It isn't right for
anybody to take that name in vain or speak it lightly, Davy. Don't ever
do it again."

"Not if I say it slow and solemn, like the minister?" queried Davy
gravely.

"No, not even then."

"Well, I won't. Ludovic Speed and Theodora Dix live in Middle Grafton
and Mrs. Rachel says he has been courting her for a hundred years. Won't
they soon be too old to get married, Anne? I hope Gilbert won't court
YOU that long. When are you going to be married, Anne? Mrs. Lynde says
it's a sure thing."

"Mrs. Lynde is a--" began Anne hotly; then stopped. "Awful old gossip,"
completed Davy calmly. "That's what every one calls her. But is it a
sure thing, Anne? I want to know."

"You're a very silly little boy, Davy," said Anne, stalking haughtily
out of the room. The kitchen was deserted and she sat down by the window
in the fast falling wintry twilight. The sun had set and the wind had
died down. A pale chilly moon looked out behind a bank of purple clouds
in the west. The sky faded out, but the strip of yellow along the
western horizon grew brighter and fiercer, as if all the stray gleams
of light were concentrating in one spot; the distant hills, rimmed with
priest-like firs, stood out in dark distinctness against it. Anne looked
across the still, white fields, cold and lifeless in the harsh light of
that grim sunset, and sighed. She was very lonely; and she was sad at
heart; for she was wondering if she would be able to return to Redmond
next year. It did not seem likely. The only scholarship possible in the
Sophomore year was a very small affair. She would not take Marilla's
money; and there seemed little prospect of being able to earn enough in
the summer vacation.

"I suppose I'll just have to drop out next year," she thought drearily,
"and teach a district school again until I earn enough to finish my
course. And by that time all my old class will have graduated and
Patty's Place will be out of the question. But there! I'm not going to
be a coward. I'm thankful I can earn my way through if necessary."

"Here's Mr. Harrison wading up the lane," announced Davy, running out.
"I hope he's brought the mail. It's three days since we got it. I want
to see what them pesky Grits are doing. I'm a Conservative, Anne. And I
tell you, you have to keep your eye on them Grits."

Mr. Harrison had brought the mail, and merry letters from Stella and
Priscilla and Phil soon dissipated Anne's blues. Aunt Jamesina, too, had
written, saying that she was keeping the hearth-fire alight, and that
the cats were all well, and the house plants doing fine.

"The weather has been real cold," she wrote, "so I let the cats sleep
in the house--Rusty and Joseph on the sofa in the living-room, and the
Sarah-cat on the foot of my bed. It's real company to hear her purring
when I wake up in the night and think of my poor daughter in the foreign
field. If it was anywhere but in India I wouldn't worry, but they say
the snakes out there are terrible. It takes all the Sarah-cats's purring
to drive away the thought of those snakes. I have enough faith for
everything but the snakes. I can't think why Providence ever made them.
Sometimes I don't think He did. I'm inclined to believe the Old Harry
had a hand in making THEM."

Anne had left a thin, typewritten communication till the last, thinking
it unimportant. When she had read it she sat very still, with tears in
her eyes.

"What is the matter, Anne?" asked Marilla.

"Miss Josephine Barry is dead," said Anne, in a low tone.

"So she has gone at last," said Marilla. "Well, she has been sick for
over a year, and the Barrys have been expecting to hear of her death any
time. It is well she is at rest for she has suffered dreadfully, Anne.
She was always kind to you."

"She has been kind to the last, Marilla. This letter is from her lawyer.
She has left me a thousand dollars in her will."

"Gracious, ain't that an awful lot of money," exclaimed Davy. "She's
the woman you and Diana lit on when you jumped into the spare room bed,
ain't she? Diana told me that story. Is that why she left you so much?"

"Hush, Davy," said Anne gently. She slipped away to the porch gable with
a full heart, leaving Marilla and Mrs. Lynde to talk over the news to
their hearts' content.

"Do you s'pose Anne will ever get married now?" speculated Davy
anxiously. "When Dorcas Sloane got married last summer she said if she'd
had enough money to live on she'd never have been bothered with a
man, but even a widower with eight children was better'n living with a
sister-in-law."

"Davy Keith, do hold your tongue," said Mrs. Rachel severely. "The way
you talk is scandalous for a small boy, that's what."




Chapter XIX

An Interlude


"To think that this is my twentieth birthday, and that I've left my
teens behind me forever," said Anne, who was curled up on the hearth-rug
with Rusty in her lap, to Aunt Jamesina who was reading in her pet
chair. They were alone in the living room. Stella and Priscilla had
gone to a committee meeting and Phil was upstairs adorning herself for a
party.

"I suppose you feel kind of, sorry" said Aunt Jamesina. "The teens are
such a nice part of life. I'm glad I've never gone out of them myself."

Anne laughed.

"You never will, Aunty. You'll be eighteen when you should be a hundred.
Yes, I'm sorry, and a little dissatisfied as well. Miss Stacy told me
long ago that by the time I was twenty my character would be formed,
for good or evil. I don't feel that it's what it should be. It's full of
flaws."

"So's everybody's," said Aunt Jamesina cheerfully. "Mine's cracked in
a hundred places. Your Miss Stacy likely meant that when you are twenty
your character would have got its permanent bent in one direction or
'tother, and would go on developing in that line. Don't worry over it,
Anne. Do your duty by God and your neighbor and yourself, and have a
good time. That's my philosophy and it's always worked pretty well.
Where's Phil off to tonight?"

"She's going to a dance, and she's got the sweetest dress for it--creamy
yellow silk and cobwebby lace. It just suits those brown tints of hers."

"There's magic in the words 'silk' and 'lace,' isn't there?" said Aunt
Jamesina. "The very sound of them makes me feel like skipping off to
a dance. And YELLOW silk. It makes one think of a dress of sunshine.
I always wanted a yellow silk dress, but first my mother and then my
husband wouldn't hear of it. The very first thing I'm going to do when I
get to heaven is to get a yellow silk dress."

Amid Anne's peal of laughter Phil came downstairs, trailing clouds of
glory, and surveyed herself in the long oval mirror on the wall.

"A flattering looking glass is a promoter of amiability," she said.
"The one in my room does certainly make me green. Do I look pretty nice,
Anne?"

"Do you really know how pretty you are, Phil?" asked Anne, in honest
admiration.

"Of course I do. What are looking glasses and men for? That wasn't what
I meant. Are all my ends tucked in? Is my skirt straight? And would this
rose look better lower down? I'm afraid it's too high--it will make me
look lop-sided. But I hate things tickling my ears."

"Everything is just right, and that southwest dimple of yours is
lovely."

"Anne, there's one thing in particular I like about you--you're so
ungrudging. There isn't a particle of envy in you."

"Why should she be envious?" demanded Aunt Jamesina. "She's not quite as
goodlooking as you, maybe, but she's got a far handsomer nose."

"I know it," conceded Phil.

"My nose always has been a great comfort to me," confessed Anne.

"And I love the way your hair grows on your forehead, Anne. And that
one wee curl, always looking as if it were going to drop, but never
dropping, is delicious. But as for noses, mine is a dreadful worry to
me. I know by the time I'm forty it will be Byrney. What do you think
I'll look like when I'm forty, Anne?"

"Like an old, matronly, married woman," teased Anne.

"I won't," said Phil, sitting down comfortably to wait for her escort.
"Joseph, you calico beastie, don't you dare jump on my lap. I won't go
to a dance all over cat hairs. No, Anne, I WON'T look matronly. But no
doubt I'll be married."

"To Alec or Alonzo?" asked Anne.

"To one of them, I suppose," sighed Phil, "if I can ever decide which."

"It shouldn't be hard to decide," scolded Aunt Jamesina.

"I was born a see-saw Aunty, and nothing can ever prevent me from
teetering."

"You ought to be more levelheaded, Philippa."

"It's best to be levelheaded, of course," agreed Philippa, "but you miss
lots of fun. As for Alec and Alonzo, if you knew them you'd understand
why it's difficult to choose between them. They're equally nice."

"Then take somebody who is nicer" suggested Aunt Jamesina. "There's that
Senior who is so devoted to you--Will Leslie. He has such nice, large,
mild eyes."

"They're a little bit too large and too mild--like a cow's," said Phil
cruelly.

"What do you say about George Parker?"

"There's nothing to say about him except that he always looks as if he
had just been starched and ironed."

"Marr Holworthy then. You can't find a fault with him."

"No, he would do if he wasn't poor. I must marry a rich man, Aunt
Jamesina. That--and good looks--is an indispensable qualification. I'd
marry Gilbert Blythe if he were rich."

"Oh, would you?" said Anne, rather viciously.

"We don't like that idea a little bit, although we don't want Gilbert
ourselves, oh, no," mocked Phil. "But don't let's talk of disagreeable
subjects. I'll have to marry sometime, I suppose, but I shall put off
the evil day as long as I can."

"You mustn't marry anybody you don't love, Phil, when all's said and
done," said Aunt Jamesina.

     "'Oh, hearts that loved in the good old way
     Have been out o' the fashion this many a day.'"

trilled Phil mockingly. "There's the carriage. I fly--Bi-bi, you two
old-fashioned darlings."

When Phil had gone Aunt Jamesina looked solemnly at Anne.

"That girl is pretty and sweet and goodhearted, but do you think she is
quite right in her mind, by spells, Anne?"

"Oh, I don't think there's anything the matter with Phil's mind," said
Anne, hiding a smile. "It's just her way of talking."

Aunt Jamesina shook her head.

"Well, I hope so, Anne. I do hope so, because I love her. But _I_ can't
understand her--she beats me. She isn't like any of the girls I ever
knew, or any of the girls I was myself."

"How many girls were you, Aunt Jimsie?"

"About half a dozen, my dear."




Chapter XX

Gilbert Speaks


"This has been a dull, prosy day," yawned Phil, stretching herself idly
on the sofa, having previously dispossessed two exceedingly indignant
cats.

Anne looked up from Pickwick Papers. Now that spring examinations were
over she was treating herself to Dickens.

"It has been a prosy day for us," she said thoughtfully, "but to some
people it has been a wonderful day. Some one has been rapturously happy
in it. Perhaps a great deed has been done somewhere today--or a great
poem written--or a great man born. And some heart has been broken,
Phil."

"Why did you spoil your pretty thought by tagging that last sentence
on, honey?" grumbled Phil. "I don't like to think of broken hearts--or
anything unpleasant."

"Do you think you'll be able to shirk unpleasant things all your life,
Phil?"

"Dear me, no. Am I not up against them now? You don't call Alec and
Alonzo pleasant things, do you, when they simply plague my life out?"

"You never take anything seriously, Phil."

"Why should I? There are enough folks who do. The world needs people
like me, Anne, just to amuse it. It would be a terrible place if
EVERYBODY were intellectual and serious and in deep, deadly earnest. MY
mission is, as Josiah Allen says, 'to charm and allure.' Confess now.
Hasn't life at Patty's Place been really much brighter and pleasanter
this past winter because I've been here to leaven you?"

"Yes, it has," owned Anne.

"And you all love me--even Aunt Jamesina, who thinks I'm stark mad. So
why should I try to be different? Oh, dear, I'm so sleepy. I was awake
until one last night, reading a harrowing ghost story. I read it in bed,
and after I had finished it do you suppose I could get out of bed to put
the light out? No! And if Stella had not fortunately come in late that
lamp would have burned good and bright till morning. When I heard Stella
I called her in, explained my predicament, and got her to put out the
light. If I had got out myself to do it I knew something would grab
me by the feet when I was getting in again. By the way, Anne, has Aunt
Jamesina decided what to do this summer?"

"Yes, she's going to stay here. I know she's doing it for the sake of
those blessed cats, although she says it's too much trouble to open her
own house, and she hates visiting."

"What are you reading?"

"Pickwick."

"That's a book that always makes me hungry," said Phil. "There's so much
good eating in it. The characters seem always to be reveling on ham and
eggs and milk punch. I generally go on a cupboard rummage after reading
Pickwick. The mere thought reminds me that I'm starving. Is there any
tidbit in the pantry, Queen Anne?"

"I made a lemon pie this morning. You may have a piece of it."

Phil dashed out to the pantry and Anne betook herself to the orchard in
company with Rusty. It was a moist, pleasantly-odorous night in early
spring. The snow was not quite all gone from the park; a little dingy
bank of it yet lay under the pines of the harbor road, screened from the
influence of April suns. It kept the harbor road muddy, and chilled the
evening air. But grass was growing green in sheltered spots and Gilbert
had found some pale, sweet arbutus in a hidden corner. He came up from
the park, his hands full of it.

Anne was sitting on the big gray boulder in the orchard looking at the
poem of a bare, birchen bough hanging against the pale red sunset
with the very perfection of grace. She was building a castle in air--a
wondrous mansion whose sunlit courts and stately halls were steeped in
Araby's perfume, and where she reigned queen and chatelaine. She frowned
as she saw Gilbert coming through the orchard. Of late she had managed
not to be left alone with Gilbert. But he had caught her fairly now; and
even Rusty had deserted her.

Gilbert sat down beside her on the boulder and held out his Mayflowers.

"Don't these remind you of home and our old schoolday picnics, Anne?"

Anne took them and buried her face in them.

"I'm in Mr. Silas Sloane's barrens this very minute," she said
rapturously.

"I suppose you will be there in reality in a few days?"

"No, not for a fortnight. I'm going to visit with Phil in Bolingbroke
before I go home. You'll be in Avonlea before I will."

"No, I shall not be in Avonlea at all this summer, Anne. I've been
offered a job in the Daily News office and I'm going to take it."

"Oh," said Anne vaguely. She wondered what a whole Avonlea summer would
be like without Gilbert. Somehow she did not like the prospect. "Well,"
she concluded flatly, "it is a good thing for you, of course."

"Yes, I've been hoping I would get it. It will help me out next year."

"You mustn't work too HARD," said Anne, without any very clear idea of
what she was saying. She wished desperately that Phil would come out.
"You've studied very constantly this winter. Isn't this a delightful
evening? Do you know, I found a cluster of white violets under that
old twisted tree over there today? I felt as if I had discovered a gold
mine."

"You are always discovering gold mines," said Gilbert--also absently.

"Let us go and see if we can find some more," suggested Anne eagerly.
"I'll call Phil and--"

"Never mind Phil and the violets just now, Anne," said Gilbert quietly,
taking her hand in a clasp from which she could not free it. "There is
something I want to say to you."

"Oh, don't say it," cried Anne, pleadingly. "Don't--PLEASE, Gilbert."

"I must. Things can't go on like this any longer. Anne, I love you. You
know I do. I--I can't tell you how much. Will you promise me that some
day you'll be my wife?"

"I--I can't," said Anne miserably. "Oh, Gilbert--you--you've spoiled
everything."

"Don't you care for me at all?" Gilbert asked after a very dreadful
pause, during which Anne had not dared to look up.

"Not--not in that way. I do care a great deal for you as a friend. But I
don't love you, Gilbert."

"But can't you give me some hope that you will--yet?"

"No, I can't," exclaimed Anne desperately. "I never, never can love
you--in that way--Gilbert. You must never speak of this to me again."

There was another pause--so long and so dreadful that Anne was driven at
last to look up. Gilbert's face was white to the lips. And his eyes--but
Anne shuddered and looked away. There was nothing romantic about this.
Must proposals be either grotesque or--horrible? Could she ever forget
Gilbert's face?

"Is there anybody else?" he asked at last in a low voice.

"No--no," said Anne eagerly. "I don't care for any one like THAT--and I
LIKE you better than anybody else in the world, Gilbert. And we must--we
must go on being friends, Gilbert."

Gilbert gave a bitter little laugh.

"Friends! Your friendship can't satisfy me, Anne. I want your love--and
you tell me I can never have that."

"I'm sorry. Forgive me, Gilbert," was all Anne could say. Where,
oh, where were all the gracious and graceful speeches wherewith, in
imagination, she had been wont to dismiss rejected suitors?

Gilbert released her hand gently.

"There isn't anything to forgive. There have been times when I thought
you did care. I've deceived myself, that's all. Goodbye, Anne."

Anne got herself to her room, sat down on her window seat behind
the pines, and cried bitterly. She felt as if something incalculably
precious had gone out of her life. It was Gilbert's friendship, of
course. Oh, why must she lose it after this fashion?

"What is the matter, honey?" asked Phil, coming in through the moonlit
gloom.

Anne did not answer. At that moment she wished Phil were a thousand
miles away.

"I suppose you've gone and refused Gilbert Blythe. You are an idiot,
Anne Shirley!"

"Do you call it idiotic to refuse to marry a man I don't love?" said
Anne coldly, goaded to reply.

"You don't know love when you see it. You've tricked something out with
your imagination that you think love, and you expect the real thing to
look like that. There, that's the first sensible thing I've ever said in
my life. I wonder how I managed it?"

"Phil," pleaded Anne, "please go away and leave me alone for a little
while. My world has tumbled into pieces. I want to reconstruct it."

"Without any Gilbert in it?" said Phil, going.

A world without any Gilbert in it! Anne repeated the words drearily.
Would it not be a very lonely, forlorn place? Well, it was all Gilbert's
fault. He had spoiled their beautiful comradeship. She must just learn
to live without it.




Chapter XXI

Roses of Yesterday


The fortnight Anne spent in Bolingbroke was a very pleasant one, with a
little under current of vague pain and dissatisfaction running through
it whenever she thought about Gilbert. There was not, however, much time
to think about him. "Mount Holly," the beautiful old Gordon homestead,
was a very gay place, overrun by Phil's friends of both sexes. There was
quite a bewildering succession of drives, dances, picnics and boating
parties, all expressively lumped together by Phil under the head of
"jamborees"; Alec and Alonzo were so constantly on hand that Anne
wondered if they ever did anything but dance attendance on that
will-o'-the-wisp of a Phil. They were both nice, manly fellows, but Anne
would not be drawn into any opinion as to which was the nicer.

"And I depended so on you to help me make up my mind which of them I
should promise to marry," mourned Phil.

"You must do that for yourself. You are quite expert at making up
your mind as to whom other people should marry," retorted Anne, rather
caustically.

"Oh, that's a very different thing," said Phil, truly.

But the sweetest incident of Anne's sojourn in Bolingbroke was the visit
to her birthplace--the little shabby yellow house in an out-of-the-way
street she had so often dreamed about. She looked at it with delighted
eyes, as she and Phil turned in at the gate.

"It's almost exactly as I've pictured it," she said. "There is no
honeysuckle over the windows, but there is a lilac tree by the gate,
and--yes, there are the muslin curtains in the windows. How glad I am it
is still painted yellow."

A very tall, very thin woman opened the door.

"Yes, the Shirleys lived here twenty years ago," she said, in answer to
Anne's question. "They had it rented. I remember 'em. They both died of
fever at onct. It was turrible sad. They left a baby. I guess it's dead
long ago. It was a sickly thing. Old Thomas and his wife took it--as if
they hadn't enough of their own."

"It didn't die," said Anne, smiling. "I was that baby."

"You don't say so! Why, you have grown," exclaimed the woman, as if she
were much surprised that Anne was not still a baby. "Come to look at
you, I see the resemblance. You're complected like your pa. He had
red hair. But you favor your ma in your eyes and mouth. She was a nice
little thing. My darter went to school to her and was nigh crazy about
her. They was buried in the one grave and the School Board put up a
tombstone to them as a reward for faithful service. Will you come in?"

"Will you let me go all over the house?" asked Anne eagerly.

"Laws, yes, you can if you like. 'Twon't take you long--there ain't much
of it. I keep at my man to build a new kitchen, but he ain't one of your
hustlers. The parlor's in there and there's two rooms upstairs. Just
prowl about yourselves. I've got to see to the baby. The east room was
the one you were born in. I remember your ma saying she loved to see the
sunrise; and I mind hearing that you was born just as the sun was rising
and its light on your face was the first thing your ma saw."

Anne went up the narrow stairs and into that little east room with a
full heart. It was as a shrine to her. Here her mother had dreamed the
exquisite, happy dreams of anticipated motherhood; here that red sunrise
light had fallen over them both in the sacred hour of birth; here her
mother had died. Anne looked about her reverently, her eyes with tears.
It was for her one of the jeweled hours of life that gleam out radiantly
forever in memory.

"Just to think of it--mother was younger than I am now when I was born,"
she whispered.

When Anne went downstairs the lady of the house met her in the hall. She
held out a dusty little packet tied with faded blue ribbon.

"Here's a bundle of old letters I found in that closet upstairs when I
came here," she said. "I dunno what they are--I never bothered to look
in 'em, but the address on the top one is 'Miss Bertha Willis,' and that
was your ma's maiden name. You can take 'em if you'd keer to have 'em."

"Oh, thank you--thank you," cried Anne, clasping the packet rapturously.

"That was all that was in the house," said her hostess. "The furniture
was all sold to pay the doctor bills, and Mrs. Thomas got your ma's
clothes and little things. I reckon they didn't last long among that
drove of Thomas youngsters. They was destructive young animals, as I
mind 'em."

"I haven't one thing that belonged to my mother," said Anne, chokily.
"I--I can never thank you enough for these letters."

"You're quite welcome. Laws, but your eyes is like your ma's. She could
just about talk with hers. Your father was sorter homely but awful nice.
I mind hearing folks say when they was married that there never was two
people more in love with each other--Pore creatures, they didn't live
much longer; but they was awful happy while they was alive, and I s'pose
that counts for a good deal."

Anne longed to get home to read her precious letters; but she made one
little pilgrimage first. She went alone to the green corner of the "old"
Bolingbroke cemetery where her father and mother were buried, and left
on their grave the white flowers she carried. Then she hastened back
to Mount Holly, shut herself up in her room, and read the letters.
Some were written by her father, some by her mother. There were not
many--only a dozen in all--for Walter and Bertha Shirley had not been
often separated during their courtship. The letters were yellow and
faded and dim, blurred with the touch of passing years. No profound
words of wisdom were traced on the stained and wrinkled pages, but only
lines of love and trust. The sweetness of forgotten things clung to
them--the far-off, fond imaginings of those long-dead lovers. Bertha
Shirley had possessed the gift of writing letters which embodied the
charming personality of the writer in words and thoughts that retained
their beauty and fragrance after the lapse of time. The letters were
tender, intimate, sacred. To Anne, the sweetest of all was the one
written after her birth to the father on a brief absence. It was full
of a proud young mother's accounts of "baby"--her cleverness, her
brightness, her thousand sweetnesses.

"I love her best when she is asleep and better still when she is awake,"
Bertha Shirley had written in the postscript. Probably it was the last
sentence she had ever penned. The end was very near for her.

"This has been the most beautiful day of my life," Anne said to Phil
that night. "I've FOUND my father and mother. Those letters have made
them REAL to me. I'm not an orphan any longer. I feel as if I had opened
a book and found roses of yesterday, sweet and beloved, between its
leaves."




Chapter XXII

Spring and Anne Return to Green Gables


The firelight shadows were dancing over the kitchen walls at Green
Gables, for the spring evening was chilly; through the open east window
drifted in the subtly sweet voices of the night. Marilla was sitting by
the fire--at least, in body. In spirit she was roaming olden ways, with
feet grown young. Of late Marilla had thus spent many an hour, when she
thought she should have been knitting for the twins.

"I suppose I'm growing old," she said.

Yet Marilla had changed but little in the past nine years, save to grow
something thinner, and even more angular; there was a little more gray
in the hair that was still twisted up in the same hard knot, with two
hairpins--WERE they the same hairpins?--still stuck through it. But her
expression was very different; the something about the mouth which had
hinted at a sense of humor had developed wonderfully; her eyes were
gentler and milder, her smile more frequent and tender.

Marilla was thinking of her whole past life, her cramped but not unhappy
childhood, the jealously hidden dreams and the blighted hopes of her
girlhood, the long, gray, narrow, monotonous years of dull middle life
that followed. And the coming of Anne--the vivid, imaginative, impetuous
child with her heart of love, and her world of fancy, bringing with her
color and warmth and radiance, until the wilderness of existence had
blossomed like the rose. Marilla felt that out of her sixty years she
had lived only the nine that had followed the advent of Anne. And Anne
would be home tomorrow night.

The kitchen door opened. Marilla looked up expecting to see Mrs. Lynde.
Anne stood before her, tall and starry-eyed, with her hands full of
Mayflowers and violets.

"Anne Shirley!" exclaimed Marilla. For once in her life she was
surprised out of her reserve; she caught her girl in her arms and
crushed her and her flowers against her heart, kissing the bright hair
and sweet face warmly. "I never looked for you till tomorrow night. How
did you get from Carmody?"

"Walked, dearest of Marillas. Haven't I done it a score of times in
the Queen's days? The mailman is to bring my trunk tomorrow; I just got
homesick all at once, and came a day earlier. And oh! I've had such a
lovely walk in the May twilight; I stopped by the barrens and picked
these Mayflowers; I came through Violet-Vale; it's just a big bowlful
of violets now--the dear, sky-tinted things. Smell them, Marilla--drink
them in."

Marilla sniffed obligingly, but she was more interested in Anne than in
drinking violets.

"Sit down, child. You must be real tired. I'm going to get you some
supper."

"There's a darling moonrise behind the hills tonight, Marilla, and oh,
how the frogs sang me home from Carmody! I do love the music of the
frogs. It seems bound up with all my happiest recollections of old
spring evenings. And it always reminds me of the night I came here
first. Do you remember it, Marilla?"

"Well, yes," said Marilla with emphasis. "I'm not likely to forget it
ever."

"They used to sing so madly in the marsh and brook that year. I would
listen to them at my window in the dusk, and wonder how they could seem
so glad and so sad at the same time. Oh, but it's good to be home again!
Redmond was splendid and Bolingbroke delightful--but Green Gables is
HOME."

"Gilbert isn't coming home this summer, I hear," said Marilla.

"No." Something in Anne's tone made Marilla glance at her sharply, but
Anne was apparently absorbed in arranging her violets in a bowl. "See,
aren't they sweet?" she went on hurriedly. "The year is a book, isn't
it, Marilla? Spring's pages are written in Mayflowers and violets,
summer's in roses, autumn's in red maple leaves, and winter in holly and
evergreen."

"Did Gilbert do well in his examinations?" persisted Marilla.

"Excellently well. He led his class. But where are the twins and Mrs.
Lynde?"

"Rachel and Dora are over at Mr. Harrison's. Davy is down at Boulters'.
I think I hear him coming now."

Davy burst in, saw Anne, stopped, and then hurled himself upon her with
a joyful yell.

"Oh, Anne, ain't I glad to see you! Say, Anne, I've grown two inches
since last fall. Mrs. Lynde measured me with her tape today, and say,
Anne, see my front tooth. It's gone. Mrs. Lynde tied one end of a string
to it and the other end to the door, and then shut the door. I sold it
to Milty for two cents. Milty's collecting teeth."

"What in the world does he want teeth for?" asked Marilla.

"To make a necklace for playing Indian Chief," explained Davy, climbing
upon Anne's lap. "He's got fifteen already, and everybody's else's
promised, so there's no use in the rest of us starting to collect, too.
I tell you the Boulters are great business people."

"Were you a good boy at Mrs. Boulter's?" asked Marilla severely.

"Yes; but say, Marilla, I'm tired of being good."

"You'd get tired of being bad much sooner, Davy-boy," said Anne.

"Well, it'd be fun while it lasted, wouldn't it?" persisted Davy. "I
could be sorry for it afterwards, couldn't I?"

"Being sorry wouldn't do away with the consequences of being bad, Davy.
Don't you remember the Sunday last summer when you ran away from Sunday
School? You told me then that being bad wasn't worth while. What were
you and Milty doing today?"

"Oh, we fished and chased the cat, and hunted for eggs, and yelled at
the echo. There's a great echo in the bush behind the Boulter barn. Say,
what is echo, Anne; I want to know."

"Echo is a beautiful nymph, Davy, living far away in the woods, and
laughing at the world from among the hills."

"What does she look like?"

"Her hair and eyes are dark, but her neck and arms are white as snow.
No mortal can ever see how fair she is. She is fleeter than a deer, and
that mocking voice of hers is all we can know of her. You can hear her
calling at night; you can hear her laughing under the stars. But you
can never see her. She flies afar if you follow her, and laughs at you
always just over the next hill."

"Is that true, Anne? Or is it a whopper?" demanded Davy staring.

"Davy," said Anne despairingly, "haven't you sense enough to distinguish
between a fairytale and a falsehood?"

"Then what is it that sasses back from the Boulter bush? I want to
know," insisted Davy.

"When you are a little older, Davy, I'll explain it all to you."

The mention of age evidently gave a new turn to Davy's thoughts for
after a few moments of reflection, he whispered solemnly:

"Anne, I'm going to be married."

"When?" asked Anne with equal solemnity.

"Oh, not until I'm grown-up, of course."

"Well, that's a relief, Davy. Who is the lady?"

"Stella Fletcher; she's in my class at school. And say, Anne, she's the
prettiest girl you ever saw. If I die before I grow up you'll keep an
eye on her, won't you?"

"Davy Keith, do stop talking such nonsense," said Marilla severely.

"'Tisn't nonsense," protested Davy in an injured tone. "She's my
promised wife, and if I was to die she'd be my promised widow, wouldn't
she? And she hasn't got a soul to look after her except her old
grandmother."

"Come and have your supper, Anne," said Marilla, "and don't encourage
that child in his absurd talk."




Chapter XXIII

Paul Cannot Find the Rock People


Life was very pleasant in Avonlea that summer, although Anne, amid
all her vacation joys, was haunted by a sense of "something gone which
should be there." She would not admit, even in her inmost reflections,
that this was caused by Gilbert's absence. But when she had to walk home
alone from prayer meetings and A.V.I.S. pow-wows, while Diana and Fred,
and many other gay couples, loitered along the dusky, starlit country
roads, there was a queer, lonely ache in her heart which she could not
explain away. Gilbert did not even write to her, as she thought he might
have done. She knew he wrote to Diana occasionally, but she would
not inquire about him; and Diana, supposing that Anne heard from him,
volunteered no information. Gilbert's mother, who was a gay, frank,
light-hearted lady, but not overburdened with tact, had a very
embarrassing habit of asking Anne, always in a painfully distinct voice
and always in the presence of a crowd, if she had heard from Gilbert
lately. Poor Anne could only blush horribly and murmur, "not very
lately," which was taken by all, Mrs. Blythe included, to be merely a
maidenly evasion.

Apart from this, Anne enjoyed her summer. Priscilla came for a merry
visit in June; and, when she had gone, Mr. and Mrs. Irving, Paul and
Charlotta the Fourth came "home" for July and August.

Echo Lodge was the scene of gaieties once more, and the echoes over the
river were kept busy mimicking the laughter that rang in the old garden
behind the spruces.

"Miss Lavendar" had not changed, except to grow even sweeter and
prettier. Paul adored her, and the companionship between them was
beautiful to see.

"But I don't call her 'mother' just by itself," he explained to Anne.
"You see, THAT name belongs just to my own little mother, and I can't
give it to any one else. You know, teacher. But I call her 'Mother
Lavendar' and I love her next best to father. I--I even love her a
LITTLE better than you, teacher."

"Which is just as it ought to be," answered Anne.

Paul was thirteen now and very tall for his years. His face and eyes
were as beautiful as ever, and his fancy was still like a prism,
separating everything that fell upon it into rainbows. He and Anne had
delightful rambles to wood and field and shore. Never were there two
more thoroughly "kindred spirits."

Charlotta the Fourth had blossomed out into young ladyhood. She wore her
hair now in an enormous pompador and had discarded the blue ribbon bows
of auld lang syne, but her face was as freckled, her nose as snubbed,
and her mouth and smiles as wide as ever.

"You don't think I talk with a Yankee accent, do you, Miss Shirley,
ma'am?" she demanded anxiously.

"I don't notice it, Charlotta."

"I'm real glad of that. They said I did at home, but I thought likely
they just wanted to aggravate me. I don't want no Yankee accent. Not
that I've a word to say against the Yankees, Miss Shirley, ma'am.
They're real civilized. But give me old P.E. Island every time."

Paul spent his first fortnight with his grandmother Irving in Avonlea.
Anne was there to meet him when he came, and found him wild with
eagerness to get to the shore--Nora and the Golden Lady and the Twin
Sailors would be there. He could hardly wait to eat his supper. Could
he not see Nora's elfin face peering around the point, watching for him
wistfully? But it was a very sober Paul who came back from the shore in
the twilight.

"Didn't you find your Rock People?" asked Anne.

Paul shook his chestnut curls sorrowfully.

"The Twin Sailors and the Golden Lady never came at all," he said. "Nora
was there--but Nora is not the same, teacher. She is changed."

"Oh, Paul, it is you who are changed," said Anne. "You have grown too
old for the Rock People. They like only children for playfellows. I
am afraid the Twin Sailors will never again come to you in the pearly,
enchanted boat with the sail of moonshine; and the Golden Lady will play
no more for you on her golden harp. Even Nora will not meet you much
longer. You must pay the penalty of growing-up, Paul. You must leave
fairyland behind you."

"You two talk as much foolishness as ever you did," said old Mrs.
Irving, half-indulgently, half-reprovingly.

"Oh, no, we don't," said Anne, shaking her head gravely. "We are getting
very, very wise, and it is such a pity. We are never half so interesting
when we have learned that language is given us to enable us to conceal
our thoughts."

"But it isn't--it is given us to exchange our thoughts," said Mrs.
Irving seriously. She had never heard of Tallyrand and did not
understand epigrams.

Anne spent a fortnight of halcyon days at Echo Lodge in the golden prime
of August. While there she incidentally contrived to hurry Ludovic Speed
in his leisurely courting of Theodora Dix, as related duly in another
chronicle of her history.(1) Arnold Sherman, an elderly friend of the
Irvings, was there at the same time, and added not a little to the
general pleasantness of life.

     (1 Chronicles of Avonlea.)

"What a nice play-time this has been," said Anne. "I feel like a giant
refreshed. And it's only a fortnight more till I go back to Kingsport,
and Redmond and Patty's Place. Patty's Place is the dearest spot, Miss
Lavendar. I feel as if I had two homes--one at Green Gables and one
at Patty's Place. But where has the summer gone? It doesn't seem a day
since I came home that spring evening with the Mayflowers. When I
was little I couldn't see from one end of the summer to the other. It
stretched before me like an unending season. Now, ''tis a handbreadth,
'tis a tale.'"

"Anne, are you and Gilbert Blythe as good friends as you used to be?"
asked Miss Lavendar quietly.

"I am just as much Gilbert's friend as ever I was, Miss Lavendar."

Miss Lavendar shook her head.

"I see something's gone wrong, Anne. I'm going to be impertinent and ask
what. Have you quarrelled?"

"No; it's only that Gilbert wants more than friendship and I can't give
him more."

"Are you sure of that, Anne?"

"Perfectly sure."

"I'm very, very sorry."

"I wonder why everybody seems to think I ought to marry Gilbert Blythe,"
said Anne petulantly.

"Because you were made and meant for each other, Anne--that is why. You
needn't toss that young head of yours. It's a fact."




Chapter XXIV

Enter Jonas


"PROSPECT POINT, "August 20th.

"Dear Anne--spelled--with--an--E," wrote Phil, "I must prop my eyelids
open long enough to write you. I've neglected you shamefully this
summer, honey, but all my other correspondents have been neglected, too.
I have a huge pile of letters to answer, so I must gird up the loins
of my mind and hoe in. Excuse my mixed metaphors. I'm fearfully sleepy.
Last night Cousin Emily and I were calling at a neighbor's. There were
several other callers there, and as soon as those unfortunate creatures
left, our hostess and her three daughters picked them all to pieces. I
knew they would begin on Cousin Emily and me as soon as the door shut
behind us. When we came home Mrs. Lilly informed us that the aforesaid
neighbor's hired boy was supposed to be down with scarlet fever. You can
always trust Mrs. Lilly to tell you cheerful things like that. I have
a horror of scarlet fever. I couldn't sleep when I went to bed for
thinking of it. I tossed and tumbled about, dreaming fearful dreams when
I did snooze for a minute; and at three I wakened up with a high fever,
a sore throat, and a raging headache. I knew I had scarlet fever; I got
up in a panic and hunted up Cousin Emily's 'doctor book' to read up the
symptoms. Anne, I had them all. So I went back to bed, and knowing the
worst, slept like a top the rest of the night. Though why a top should
sleep sounder than anything else I never could understand. But this
morning I was quite well, so it couldn't have been the fever. I suppose
if I did catch it last night it couldn't have developed so soon. I can
remember that in daytime, but at three o'clock at night I never can be
logical.

"I suppose you wonder what I'm doing at Prospect Point. Well, I always
like to spend a month of summer at the shore, and father insists that
I come to his second-cousin Emily's 'select boardinghouse' at Prospect
Point. So a fortnight ago I came as usual. And as usual old 'Uncle Mark
Miller' brought me from the station with his ancient buggy and what he
calls his 'generous purpose' horse. He is a nice old man and gave me
a handful of pink peppermints. Peppermints always seem to me such a
religious sort of candy--I suppose because when I was a little girl
Grandmother Gordon always gave them to me in church. Once I asked,
referring to the smell of peppermints, 'Is that the odor of sanctity?' I
didn't like to eat Uncle Mark's peppermints because he just fished them
loose out of his pocket, and had to pick some rusty nails and other
things from among them before he gave them to me. But I wouldn't hurt
his dear old feelings for anything, so I carefully sowed them along the
road at intervals. When the last one was gone, Uncle Mark said, a little
rebukingly, 'Ye shouldn't a'et all them candies to onct, Miss Phil.
You'll likely have the stummick-ache.'

"Cousin Emily has only five boarders besides myself--four old ladies and
one young man. My right-hand neighbor is Mrs. Lilly. She is one of those
people who seem to take a gruesome pleasure in detailing all their many
aches and pains and sicknesses. You cannot mention any ailment but she
says, shaking her head, 'Ah, I know too well what that is'--and then you
get all the details. Jonas declares he once spoke of locomotor ataxia in
hearing and she said she knew too well what that was. She suffered from
it for ten years and was finally cured by a traveling doctor.

"Who is Jonas? Just wait, Anne Shirley. You'll hear all about Jonas in
the proper time and place. He is not to be mixed up with estimable old
ladies.

"My left-hand neighbor at the table is Mrs. Phinney. She always speaks
with a wailing, dolorous voice--you are nervously expecting her to burst
into tears every moment. She gives you the impression that life to her
is indeed a vale of tears, and that a smile, never to speak of a laugh,
is a frivolity truly reprehensible. She has a worse opinion of me than
Aunt Jamesina, and she doesn't love me hard to atone for it, as Aunty J.
does, either.

"Miss Maria Grimsby sits cati-corner from me. The first day I came I
remarked to Miss Maria that it looked a little like rain--and Miss Maria
laughed. I said the road from the station was very pretty--and Miss
Maria laughed. I said there seemed to be a few mosquitoes left yet--and
Miss Maria laughed. I said that Prospect Point was as beautiful as
ever--and Miss Maria laughed. If I were to say to Miss Maria, 'My father
has hanged himself, my mother has taken poison, my brother is in the
penitentiary, and I am in the last stages of consumption,' Miss Maria
would laugh. She can't help it--she was born so; but is very sad and
awful.

"The fifth old lady is Mrs. Grant. She is a sweet old thing; but
she never says anything but good of anybody and so she is a very
uninteresting conversationalist.

"And now for Jonas, Anne.

"That first day I came I saw a young man sitting opposite me at the
table, smiling at me as if he had known me from my cradle. I knew, for
Uncle Mark had told me, that his name was Jonas Blake, that he was a
Theological Student from St. Columbia, and that he had taken charge of
the Point Prospect Mission Church for the summer.

"He is a very ugly young man--really, the ugliest young man I've ever
seen. He has a big, loose-jointed figure with absurdly long legs. His
hair is tow-color and lank, his eyes are green, and his mouth is big,
and his ears--but I never think about his ears if I can help it.

"He has a lovely voice--if you shut your eyes he is adorable--and he
certainly has a beautiful soul and disposition.

"We were good chums right way. Of course he is a graduate of Redmond,
and that is a link between us. We fished and boated together; and we
walked on the sands by moonlight. He didn't look so homely by moonlight
and oh, he was nice. Niceness fairly exhaled from him. The old
ladies--except Mrs. Grant--don't approve of Jonas, because he laughs and
jokes--and because he evidently likes the society of frivolous me better
than theirs.

"Somehow, Anne, I don't want him to think me frivolous. This is
ridiculous. Why should I care what a tow-haired person called Jonas,
whom I never saw before thinks of me?

"Last Sunday Jonas preached in the village church. I went, of course,
but I couldn't realize that Jonas was going to preach. The fact that he
was a minister--or going to be one--persisted in seeming a huge joke to
me.

"Well, Jonas preached. And, by the time he had preached ten minutes, I
felt so small and insignificant that I thought I must be invisible to
the naked eye. Jonas never said a word about women and he never
looked at me. But I realized then and there what a pitiful, frivolous,
small-souled little butterfly I was, and how horribly different I must
be from Jonas' ideal woman. SHE would be grand and strong and noble. He
was so earnest and tender and true. He was everything a minister ought
to be. I wondered how I could ever have thought him ugly--but he really
is!--with those inspired eyes and that intellectual brow which the
roughly-falling hair hid on week days.

"It was a splendid sermon and I could have listened to it forever, and
it made me feel utterly wretched. Oh, I wish I was like YOU, Anne.

"He caught up with me on the road home, and grinned as cheerfully as
usual. But his grin could never deceive me again. I had seen the REAL
Jonas. I wondered if he could ever see the REAL PHIL--whom NOBODY, not
even you, Anne, has ever seen yet.

"'Jonas,' I said--I forgot to call him Mr. Blake. Wasn't it dreadful?
But there are times when things like that don't matter--'Jonas, you were
born to be a minister. You COULDN'T be anything else.'

"'No, I couldn't,' he said soberly. 'I tried to be something else for
a long time--I didn't want to be a minister. But I came to see at last
that it was the work given me to do--and God helping me, I shall try to
do it.'

"His voice was low and reverent. I thought that he would do his work and
do it well and nobly; and happy the woman fitted by nature and training
to help him do it. SHE would be no feather, blown about by every fickle
wind of fancy. SHE would always know what hat to put on. Probably she
would have only one. Ministers never have much money. But she wouldn't
mind having one hat or none at all, because she would have Jonas.

"Anne Shirley, don't you dare to say or hint or think that I've
fallen in love with Mr. Blake. Could I care for a lank, poor, ugly
theologue--named Jonas? As Uncle Mark says, 'It's impossible, and what's
more it's improbable.'

"Good night, PHIL."

"P.S. It is impossible--but I am horribly afraid it's true. I'm happy
and wretched and scared. HE can NEVER care for me, I know. Do you think
I could ever develop into a passable minister's wife, Anne? And WOULD
they expect me to lead in prayer? P G."




Chapter XXV

Enter Prince Charming


"I'm contrasting the claims of indoors and out," said Anne, looking from
the window of Patty's Place to the distant pines of the park.

"I've an afternoon to spend in sweet doing nothing, Aunt Jimsie. Shall
I spend it here where there is a cosy fire, a plateful of delicious
russets, three purring and harmonious cats, and two impeccable china
dogs with green noses? Or shall I go to the park, where there is the
lure of gray woods and of gray water lapping on the harbor rocks?"

"If I was as young as you, I'd decide in favor of the park," said Aunt
Jamesina, tickling Joseph's yellow ear with a knitting needle.

"I thought that you claimed to be as young as any of us, Aunty," teased
Anne.

"Yes, in my soul. But I'll admit my legs aren't as young as yours. You
go and get some fresh air, Anne. You look pale lately."

"I think I'll go to the park," said Anne restlessly. "I don't feel like
tame domestic joys today. I want to feel alone and free and wild. The
park will be empty, for every one will be at the football match."

"Why didn't you go to it?"

"'Nobody axed me, sir, she said'--at least, nobody but that horrid
little Dan Ranger. I wouldn't go anywhere with him; but rather than hurt
his poor little tender feelings I said I wasn't going to the game at
all. I don't mind. I'm not in the mood for football today somehow."

"You go and get some fresh air," repeated Aunt Jamesina, "but take your
umbrella, for I believe it's going to rain. I've rheumatism in my leg."

"Only old people should have rheumatism, Aunty."

"Anybody is liable to rheumatism in her legs, Anne. It's only old people
who should have rheumatism in their souls, though. Thank goodness, I
never have. When you get rheumatism in your soul you might as well go
and pick out your coffin."

It was November--the month of crimson sunsets, parting birds, deep,
sad hymns of the sea, passionate wind-songs in the pines. Anne roamed
through the pineland alleys in the park and, as she said, let that great
sweeping wind blow the fogs out of her soul. Anne was not wont to be
troubled with soul fog. But, somehow, since her return to Redmond for
this third year, life had not mirrored her spirit back to her with its
old, perfect, sparkling clearness.

Outwardly, existence at Patty's Place was the same pleasant round
of work and study and recreation that it had always been. On Friday
evenings the big, fire-lighted livingroom was crowded by callers
and echoed to endless jest and laughter, while Aunt Jamesina smiled
beamingly on them all. The "Jonas" of Phil's letter came often, running
up from St. Columbia on the early train and departing on the late. He
was a general favorite at Patty's Place, though Aunt Jamesina shook her
head and opined that divinity students were not what they used to be.

"He's VERY nice, my dear," she told Phil, "but ministers ought to be
graver and more dignified."

"Can't a man laugh and laugh and be a Christian still?" demanded Phil.

"Oh, MEN--yes. But I was speaking of MINISTERS, my dear," said Aunt
Jamesina rebukingly. "And you shouldn't flirt so with Mr. Blake--you
really shouldn't."

"I'm not flirting with him," protested Phil.

Nobody believed her, except Anne. The others thought she was amusing
herself as usual, and told her roundly that she was behaving very badly.

"Mr. Blake isn't of the Alec-and-Alonzo type, Phil," said Stella
severely. "He takes things seriously. You may break his heart."

"Do you really think I could?" asked Phil. "I'd love to think so."

"Philippa Gordon! I never thought you were utterly unfeeling. The idea
of you saying you'd love to break a man's heart!"

"I didn't say so, honey. Quote me correctly. I said I'd like to think I
COULD break it. I would like to know I had the POWER to do it."

"I don't understand you, Phil. You are leading that man on
deliberately--and you know you don't mean anything by it."

"I mean to make him ask me to marry him if I can," said Phil calmly.

"I give you up," said Stella hopelessly.

Gilbert came occasionally on Friday evenings. He seemed always in good
spirits, and held his own in the jests and repartee that flew about.
He neither sought nor avoided Anne. When circumstances brought them
in contact he talked to her pleasantly and courteously, as to any
newly-made acquaintance. The old camaraderie was gone entirely. Anne
felt it keenly; but she told herself she was very glad and thankful that
Gilbert had got so completely over his disappointment in regard to her.
She had really been afraid, that April evening in the orchard, that she
had hurt him terribly and that the wound would be long in healing. Now
she saw that she need not have worried. Men have died and the worms
have eaten them but not for love. Gilbert evidently was in no danger of
immediate dissolution. He was enjoying life, and he was full of ambition
and zest. For him there was to be no wasting in despair because a woman
was fair and cold. Anne, as she listened to the ceaseless badinage that
went on between him and Phil, wondered if she had only imagined that
look in his eyes when she had told him she could never care for him.

There were not lacking those who would gladly have stepped into
Gilbert's vacant place. But Anne snubbed them without fear and without
reproach. If the real Prince Charming was never to come she would have
none of a substitute. So she sternly told herself that gray day in the
windy park.

Suddenly the rain of Aunt Jamesina's prophecy came with a swish and
rush. Anne put up her umbrella and hurried down the slope. As she turned
out on the harbor road a savage gust of wind tore along it. Instantly
her umbrella turned wrong side out. Anne clutched at it in despair. And
then--there came a voice close to her.

"Pardon me--may I offer you the shelter of my umbrella?"

Anne looked up. Tall and handsome and distinguished-looking--dark,
melancholy, inscrutable eyes--melting, musical, sympathetic voice--yes,
the very hero of her dreams stood before her in the flesh. He could not
have more closely resembled her ideal if he had been made to order.

"Thank you," she said confusedly.

"We'd better hurry over to that little pavillion on the point,"
suggested the unknown. "We can wait there until this shower is over. It
is not likely to rain so heavily very long."

The words were very commonplace, but oh, the tone! And the smile which
accompanied them! Anne felt her heart beating strangely.

Together they scurried to the pavilion and sat breathlessly down under
its friendly roof. Anne laughingly held up her false umbrella.

"It is when my umbrella turns inside out that I am convinced of the
total depravity of inanimate things," she said gaily.

The raindrops sparkled on her shining hair; its loosened rings curled
around her neck and forehead. Her cheeks were flushed, her eyes big and
starry. Her companion looked down at her admiringly. She felt herself
blushing under his gaze. Who could he be? Why, there was a bit of the
Redmond white and scarlet pinned to his coat lapel. Yet she had thought
she knew, by sight at least, all the Redmond students except the
Freshmen. And this courtly youth surely was no Freshman.

"We are schoolmates, I see," he said, smiling at Anne's colors. "That
ought to be sufficient introduction. My name is Royal Gardner. And you
are the Miss Shirley who read the Tennyson paper at the Philomathic the
other evening, aren't you?"

"Yes; but I cannot place you at all," said Anne, frankly. "Please, where
DO you belong?"

"I feel as if I didn't belong anywhere yet. I put in my Freshman and
Sophomore years at Redmond two years ago. I've been in Europe ever
since. Now I've come back to finish my Arts course."

"This is my Junior year, too," said Anne.

"So we are classmates as well as collegemates. I am reconciled to the
loss of the years that the locust has eaten," said her companion, with a
world of meaning in those wonderful eyes of his.

The rain came steadily down for the best part of an hour. But the time
seemed really very short. When the clouds parted and a burst of pale
November sunshine fell athwart the harbor and the pines Anne and her
companion walked home together. By the time they had reached the gate of
Patty's Place he had asked permission to call, and had received it. Anne
went in with cheeks of flame and her heart beating to her fingertips.
Rusty, who climbed into her lap and tried to kiss her, found a very
absent welcome. Anne, with her soul full of romantic thrills, had no
attention to spare just then for a crop-eared pussy cat.

That evening a parcel was left at Patty's Place for Miss Shirley. It was
a box containing a dozen magnificent roses. Phil pounced impertinently
on the card that fell from it, read the name and the poetical quotation
written on the back.

"Royal Gardner!" she exclaimed. "Why, Anne, I didn't know you were
acquainted with Roy Gardner!"

"I met him in the park this afternoon in the rain," explained Anne
hurriedly. "My umbrella turned inside out and he came to my rescue with
his."

"Oh!" Phil peered curiously at Anne. "And is that exceedingly
commonplace incident any reason why he should send us longstemmed roses
by the dozen, with a very sentimental rhyme? Or why we should blush
divinest rosy-red when we look at his card? Anne, thy face betrayeth
thee."

"Don't talk nonsense, Phil. Do you know Mr. Gardner?"

"I've met his two sisters, and I know of him. So does everybody
worthwhile in Kingsport. The Gardners are among the richest, bluest,
of Bluenoses. Roy is adorably handsome and clever. Two years ago his
mother's health failed and he had to leave college and go abroad with
her--his father is dead. He must have been greatly disappointed to have
to give up his class, but they say he was perfectly sweet about it.
Fee--fi--fo--fum, Anne. I smell romance. Almost do I envy you, but not
quite. After all, Roy Gardner isn't Jonas."

"You goose!" said Anne loftily. But she lay long awake that night, nor
did she wish for sleep. Her waking fancies were more alluring than any
vision of dreamland. Had the real Prince come at last? Recalling those
glorious dark eyes which had gazed so deeply into her own, Anne was very
strongly inclined to think he had.




Chapter XXVI

Enter Christine


The girls at Patty's Place were dressing for the reception which the
Juniors were giving for the Seniors in February. Anne surveyed herself
in the mirror of the blue room with girlish satisfaction. She had a
particularly pretty gown on. Originally it had been only a simple little
slip of cream silk with a chiffon overdress. But Phil had insisted on
taking it home with her in the Christmas holidays and embroidering tiny
rosebuds all over the chiffon. Phil's fingers were deft, and the result
was a dress which was the envy of every Redmond girl. Even Allie Boone,
whose frocks came from Paris, was wont to look with longing eyes on that
rosebud concoction as Anne trailed up the main staircase at Redmond in
it.

Anne was trying the effect of a white orchid in her hair. Roy Gardner
had sent her white orchids for the reception, and she knew no other
Redmond girl would have them that night--when Phil came in with admiring
gaze.

"Anne, this is certainly your night for looking handsome. Nine nights
out of ten I can easily outshine you. The tenth you blossom out suddenly
into something that eclipses me altogether. How do you manage it?"

"It's the dress, dear. Fine feathers."

"'Tisn't. The last evening you flamed out into beauty you wore your old
blue flannel shirtwaist that Mrs. Lynde made you. If Roy hadn't already
lost head and heart about you he certainly would tonight. But I don't
like orchids on you, Anne. No; it isn't jealousy. Orchids don't seem to
BELONG to you. They're too exotic--too tropical--too insolent. Don't put
them in your hair, anyway."

"Well, I won't. I admit I'm not fond of orchids myself. I don't think
they're related to me. Roy doesn't often send them--he knows I like
flowers I can live with. Orchids are only things you can visit with."

"Jonas sent me some dear pink rosebuds for the evening--but--he isn't
coming himself. He said he had to lead a prayer-meeting in the slums! I
don't believe he wanted to come. Anne, I'm horribly afraid Jonas doesn't
really care anything about me. And I'm trying to decide whether I'll
pine away and die, or go on and get my B.A. and be sensible and useful."

"You couldn't possibly be sensible and useful, Phil, so you'd better
pine away and die," said Anne cruelly.

"Heartless Anne!"

"Silly Phil! You know quite well that Jonas loves you."

"But--he won't TELL me so. And I can't MAKE him. He LOOKS it, I'll
admit. But speak-to-me-only-with-thine-eyes isn't a really reliable
reason for embroidering doilies and hemstitching tablecloths. I don't
want to begin such work until I'm really engaged. It would be tempting
Fate."

"Mr. Blake is afraid to ask you to marry him, Phil. He is poor and can't
offer you a home such as you've always had. You know that is the only
reason he hasn't spoken long ago."

"I suppose so," agreed Phil dolefully. "Well"--brightening up--"if he
WON'T ask me to marry him I'll ask him, that's all. So it's bound to
come right. I won't worry. By the way, Gilbert Blythe is going about
constantly with Christine Stuart. Did you know?"

Anne was trying to fasten a little gold chain about her throat. She
suddenly found the clasp difficult to manage. WHAT was the matter with
it--or with her fingers?

"No," she said carelessly. "Who is Christine Stuart?"

"Ronald Stuart's sister. She's in Kingsport this winter studying music.
I haven't seen her, but they say she's very pretty and that Gilbert is
quite crazy over her. How angry I was when you refused Gilbert, Anne.
But Roy Gardner was foreordained for you. I can see that now. You were
right, after all."

Anne did not blush, as she usually did when the girls assumed that her
eventual marriage to Roy Gardner was a settled thing. All at once she
felt rather dull. Phil's chatter seemed trivial and the reception a
bore. She boxed poor Rusty's ears.

"Get off that cushion instantly, you cat, you! Why don't you stay down
where you belong?"

Anne picked up her orchids and went downstairs, where Aunt Jamesina was
presiding over a row of coats hung before the fire to warm. Roy Gardner
was waiting for Anne and teasing the Sarah-cat while he waited. The
Sarah-cat did not approve of him. She always turned her back on him.
But everybody else at Patty's Place liked him very much. Aunt Jamesina,
carried away by his unfailing and deferential courtesy, and the pleading
tones of his delightful voice, declared he was the nicest young man she
ever knew, and that Anne was a very fortunate girl. Such remarks made
Anne restive. Roy's wooing had certainly been as romantic as girlish
heart could desire, but--she wished Aunt Jamesina and the girls would
not take things so for granted. When Roy murmured a poetical compliment
as he helped her on with her coat, she did not blush and thrill as
usual; and he found her rather silent in their brief walk to Redmond.
He thought she looked a little pale when she came out of the coeds'
dressing room; but as they entered the reception room her color and
sparkle suddenly returned to her. She turned to Roy with her gayest
expression. He smiled back at her with what Phil called "his deep,
black, velvety smile." Yet she really did not see Roy at all. She was
acutely conscious that Gilbert was standing under the palms just across
the room talking to a girl who must be Christine Stuart.

She was very handsome, in the stately style destined to become rather
massive in middle life. A tall girl, with large dark-blue eyes, ivory
outlines, and a gloss of darkness on her smooth hair.

"She looks just as I've always wanted to look," thought Anne miserably.
"Rose-leaf complexion--starry violet eyes--raven hair--yes, she has them
all. It's a wonder her name isn't Cordelia Fitzgerald into the bargain!
But I don't believe her figure is as good as mine, and her nose
certainly isn't."

Anne felt a little comforted by this conclusion.




Chapter XXVII

Mutual Confidences


March came in that winter like the meekest and mildest of lambs,
bringing days that were crisp and golden and tingling, each followed
by a frosty pink twilight which gradually lost itself in an elfland of
moonshine.

Over the girls at Patty's Place was falling the shadow of April
examinations. They were studying hard; even Phil had settled down to
text and notebooks with a doggedness not to be expected of her.

"I'm going to take the Johnson Scholarship in Mathematics," she
announced calmly. "I could take the one in Greek easily, but I'd rather
take the mathematical one because I want to prove to Jonas that I'm
really enormously clever."

"Jonas likes you better for your big brown eyes and your crooked smile
than for all the brains you carry under your curls," said Anne.

"When I was a girl it wasn't considered lady-like to know anything about
Mathematics," said Aunt Jamesina. "But times have changed. I don't know
that it's all for the better. Can you cook, Phil?"

"No, I never cooked anything in my life except a gingerbread and it was
a failure--flat in the middle and hilly round the edges. You know the
kind. But, Aunty, when I begin in good earnest to learn to cook don't
you think the brains that enable me to win a mathematical scholarship
will also enable me to learn cooking just as well?"

"Maybe," said Aunt Jamesina cautiously. "I am not decrying the higher
education of women. My daughter is an M.A. She can cook, too. But
I taught her to cook BEFORE I let a college professor teach her
Mathematics."

In mid-March came a letter from Miss Patty Spofford, saying that she and
Miss Maria had decided to remain abroad for another year.

"So you may have Patty's Place next winter, too," she wrote. "Maria and
I are going to run over Egypt. I want to see the Sphinx once before I
die."

"Fancy those two dames 'running over Egypt'! I wonder if they'll look up
at the Sphinx and knit," laughed Priscilla.

"I'm so glad we can keep Patty's Place for another year," said Stella.
"I was afraid they'd come back. And then our jolly little nest here
would be broken up--and we poor callow nestlings thrown out on the cruel
world of boardinghouses again."

"I'm off for a tramp in the park," announced Phil, tossing her book
aside. "I think when I am eighty I'll be glad I went for a walk in the
park tonight."

"What do you mean?" asked Anne.

"Come with me and I'll tell you, honey."

They captured in their ramble all the mysteries and magics of a March
evening. Very still and mild it was, wrapped in a great, white, brooding
silence--a silence which was yet threaded through with many little
silvery sounds which you could hear if you hearkened as much with your
soul as your ears. The girls wandered down a long pineland aisle that
seemed to lead right out into the heart of a deep-red, overflowing
winter sunset.

"I'd go home and write a poem this blessed minute if I only knew how,"
declared Phil, pausing in an open space where a rosy light was staining
the green tips of the pines. "It's all so wonderful here--this great,
white stillness, and those dark trees that always seem to be thinking."

"'The woods were God's first temples,'" quoted Anne softly. "One can't
help feeling reverent and adoring in such a place. I always feel so near
Him when I walk among the pines."

"Anne, I'm the happiest girl in the world," confessed Phil suddenly.

"So Mr. Blake has asked you to marry him at last?" said Anne calmly.

"Yes. And I sneezed three times while he was asking me. Wasn't that
horrid? But I said 'yes' almost before he finished--I was so afraid he
might change his mind and stop. I'm besottedly happy. I couldn't really
believe before that Jonas would ever care for frivolous me."

"Phil, you're not really frivolous," said Anne gravely. "'Way down
underneath that frivolous exterior of yours you've got a dear, loyal,
womanly little soul. Why do you hide it so?"

"I can't help it, Queen Anne. You are right--I'm not frivolous at heart.
But there's a sort of frivolous skin over my soul and I can't take it
off. As Mrs. Poyser says, I'd have to be hatched over again and hatched
different before I could change it. But Jonas knows the real me and
loves me, frivolity and all. And I love him. I never was so surprised
in my life as I was when I found out I loved him. I'd never thought it
possible to fall in love with an ugly man. Fancy me coming down to one
solitary beau. And one named Jonas! But I mean to call him Jo. That's
such a nice, crisp little name. I couldn't nickname Alonzo."

"What about Alec and Alonzo?"

"Oh, I told them at Christmas that I never could marry either of them.
It seems so funny now to remember that I ever thought it possible that I
might. They felt so badly I just cried over both of them--howled. But I
knew there was only one man in the world I could ever marry. I had made
up my own mind for once and it was real easy, too. It's very delightful
to feel so sure, and know it's your own sureness and not somebody
else's."

"Do you suppose you'll be able to keep it up?"

"Making up my mind, you mean? I don't know, but Jo has given me a
splendid rule. He says, when I'm perplexed, just to do what I would
wish I had done when I shall be eighty. Anyhow, Jo can make up his mind
quickly enough, and it would be uncomfortable to have too much mind in
the same house."

"What will your father and mother say?"

"Father won't say much. He thinks everything I do right. But mother WILL
talk. Oh, her tongue will be as Byrney as her nose. But in the end it
will be all right."

"You'll have to give up a good many things you've always had, when you
marry Mr. Blake, Phil."

"But I'll have HIM. I won't miss the other things. We're to be married
a year from next June. Jo graduates from St. Columbia this spring, you
know. Then he's going to take a little mission church down on Patterson
Street in the slums. Fancy me in the slums! But I'd go there or to
Greenland's icy mountains with him."

"And this is the girl who would NEVER marry a man who wasn't rich,"
commented Anne to a young pine tree.

"Oh, don't cast up the follies of my youth to me. I shall be poor as
gaily as I've been rich. You'll see. I'm going to learn how to cook
and make over dresses. I've learned how to market since I've lived
at Patty's Place; and once I taught a Sunday School class for a whole
summer. Aunt Jamesina says I'll ruin Jo's career if I marry him. But
I won't. I know I haven't much sense or sobriety, but I've got what is
ever so much better--the knack of making people like me. There is a
man in Bolingbroke who lisps and always testifies in prayer-meeting.
He says, 'If you can't thine like an electric thtar thine like a
candlethtick.' I'll be Jo's little candlestick."

"Phil, you're incorrigible. Well, I love you so much that I can't make
nice, light, congratulatory little speeches. But I'm heart-glad of your
happiness."

"I know. Those big gray eyes of yours are brimming over with real
friendship, Anne. Some day I'll look the same way at you. You're going
to marry Roy, aren't you, Anne?"

"My dear Philippa, did you ever hear of the famous Betty Baxter, who
'refused a man before he'd axed her'? I am not going to emulate that
celebrated lady by either refusing or accepting any one before he 'axes'
me."

"All Redmond knows that Roy is crazy about you," said Phil candidly.
"And you DO love him, don't you, Anne?"

"I--I suppose so," said Anne reluctantly. She felt that she ought to be
blushing while making such a confession; but she was not; on the other
hand, she always blushed hotly when any one said anything about Gilbert
Blythe or Christine Stuart in her hearing. Gilbert Blythe and Christine
Stuart were nothing to her--absolutely nothing. But Anne had given up
trying to analyze the reason of her blushes. As for Roy, of course she
was in love with him--madly so. How could she help it? Was he not her
ideal? Who could resist those glorious dark eyes, and that pleading
voice? Were not half the Redmond girls wildly envious? And what a
charming sonnet he had sent her, with a box of violets, on her birthday!
Anne knew every word of it by heart. It was very good stuff of its kind,
too. Not exactly up to the level of Keats or Shakespeare--even Anne
was not so deeply in love as to think that. But it was very tolerable
magazine verse. And it was addressed to HER--not to Laura or Beatrice or
the Maid of Athens, but to her, Anne Shirley. To be told in rhythmical
cadences that her eyes were stars of the morning--that her cheek had
the flush it stole from the sunrise--that her lips were redder than the
roses of Paradise, was thrillingly romantic. Gilbert would never have
dreamed of writing a sonnet to her eyebrows. But then, Gilbert could
see a joke. She had once told Roy a funny story--and he had not seen
the point of it. She recalled the chummy laugh she and Gilbert had had
together over it, and wondered uneasily if life with a man who had no
sense of humor might not be somewhat uninteresting in the long run. But
who could expect a melancholy, inscrutable hero to see the humorous side
of things? It would be flatly unreasonable.




Chapter XXVIII

A June Evening


"I wonder what it would be like to live in a world where it was always
June," said Anne, as she came through the spice and bloom of the twilit
orchard to the front door steps, where Marilla and Mrs. Rachel were
sitting, talking over Mrs. Samson Coates' funeral, which they had
attended that day. Dora sat between them, diligently studying her
lessons; but Davy was sitting tailor-fashion on the grass, looking as
gloomy and depressed as his single dimple would let him.

"You'd get tired of it," said Marilla, with a sigh.

"I daresay; but just now I feel that it would take me a long time to get
tired of it, if it were all as charming as today. Everything loves June.
Davy-boy, why this melancholy November face in blossom-time?"

"I'm just sick and tired of living," said the youthful pessimist.

"At ten years? Dear me, how sad!"

"I'm not making fun," said Davy with dignity. "I'm
dis--dis--discouraged"--bringing out the big word with a valiant effort.

"Why and wherefore?" asked Anne, sitting down beside him.

"'Cause the new teacher that come when Mr. Holmes got sick give me ten
sums to do for Monday. It'll take me all day tomorrow to do them. It
isn't fair to have to work Saturdays. Milty Boulter said he wouldn't do
them, but Marilla says I've got to. I don't like Miss Carson a bit."

"Don't talk like that about your teacher, Davy Keith," said Mrs. Rachel
severely. "Miss Carson is a very fine girl. There is no nonsense about
her."

"That doesn't sound very attractive," laughed Anne. "I like people to
have a little nonsense about them. But I'm inclined to have a better
opinion of Miss Carson than you have. I saw her in prayer-meeting last
night, and she has a pair of eyes that can't always look sensible. Now,
Davy-boy, take heart of grace. 'Tomorrow will bring another day' and
I'll help you with the sums as far as in me lies. Don't waste this
lovely hour 'twixt light and dark worrying over arithmetic."

"Well, I won't," said Davy, brightening up. "If you help me with the
sums I'll have 'em done in time to go fishing with Milty. I wish old
Aunt Atossa's funeral was tomorrow instead of today. I wanted to go to
it 'cause Milty said his mother said Aunt Atossa would be sure to rise
up in her coffin and say sarcastic things to the folks that come to see
her buried. But Marilla said she didn't."

"Poor Atossa laid in her coffin peaceful enough," said Mrs. Lynde
solemnly. "I never saw her look so pleasant before, that's what. Well,
there weren't many tears shed over her, poor old soul. The Elisha
Wrights are thankful to be rid of her, and I can't say I blame them a
mite."

"It seems to me a most dreadful thing to go out of the world and not
leave one person behind you who is sorry you are gone," said Anne,
shuddering.

"Nobody except her parents ever loved poor Atossa, that's certain, not
even her husband," averred Mrs. Lynde. "She was his fourth wife. He'd
sort of got into the habit of marrying. He only lived a few years after
he married her. The doctor said he died of dyspepsia, but I shall always
maintain that he died of Atossa's tongue, that's what. Poor soul, she
always knew everything about her neighbors, but she never was very well
acquainted with herself. Well, she's gone anyhow; and I suppose the next
excitement will be Diana's wedding."

"It seems funny and horrible to think of Diana's being married," sighed
Anne, hugging her knees and looking through the gap in the Haunted Wood
to the light that was shining in Diana's room.

"I don't see what's horrible about it, when she's doing so well," said
Mrs. Lynde emphatically. "Fred Wright has a fine farm and he is a model
young man."

"He certainly isn't the wild, dashing, wicked, young man Diana once
wanted to marry," smiled Anne. "Fred is extremely good."

"That's just what he ought to be. Would you want Diana to marry a wicked
man? Or marry one yourself?"

"Oh, no. I wouldn't want to marry anybody who was wicked, but I think
I'd like it if he COULD be wicked and WOULDN'T. Now, Fred is HOPELESSLY
good."

"You'll have more sense some day, I hope," said Marilla.

Marilla spoke rather bitterly. She was grievously disappointed. She knew
Anne had refused Gilbert Blythe. Avonlea gossip buzzed over the fact,
which had leaked out, nobody knew how. Perhaps Charlie Sloane had
guessed and told his guesses for truth. Perhaps Diana had betrayed it
to Fred and Fred had been indiscreet. At all events it was known; Mrs.
Blythe no longer asked Anne, in public or private, if she had heard
lately from Gilbert, but passed her by with a frosty bow. Anne, who
had always liked Gilbert's merry, young-hearted mother, was grieved in
secret over this. Marilla said nothing; but Mrs. Lynde gave Anne many
exasperated digs about it, until fresh gossip reached that worthy lady,
through the medium of Moody Spurgeon MacPherson's mother, that Anne had
another "beau" at college, who was rich and handsome and good all in
one. After that Mrs. Rachel held her tongue, though she still wished in
her inmost heart that Anne had accepted Gilbert. Riches were all very
well; but even Mrs. Rachel, practical soul though she was, did not
consider them the one essential. If Anne "liked" the Handsome Unknown
better than Gilbert there was nothing more to be said; but Mrs. Rachel
was dreadfully afraid that Anne was going to make the mistake of
marrying for money. Marilla knew Anne too well to fear this; but she
felt that something in the universal scheme of things had gone sadly
awry.

"What is to be, will be," said Mrs. Rachel gloomily, "and what isn't
to be happens sometimes. I can't help believing it's going to happen in
Anne's case, if Providence doesn't interfere, that's what." Mrs. Rachel
sighed. She was afraid Providence wouldn't interfere; and she didn't
dare to.

Anne had wandered down to the Dryad's Bubble and was curled up among the
ferns at the root of the big white birch where she and Gilbert had so
often sat in summers gone by. He had gone into the newspaper office
again when college closed, and Avonlea seemed very dull without him. He
never wrote to her, and Anne missed the letters that never came. To be
sure, Roy wrote twice a week; his letters were exquisite compositions
which would have read beautifully in a memoir or biography. Anne felt
herself more deeply in love with him than ever when she read them; but
her heart never gave the queer, quick, painful bound at sight of his
letters which it had given one day when Mrs. Hiram Sloane had handed her
out an envelope addressed in Gilbert's black, upright handwriting. Anne
had hurried home to the east gable and opened it eagerly--to find a
typewritten copy of some college society report--"only that and nothing
more." Anne flung the harmless screed across her room and sat down to
write an especially nice epistle to Roy.

Diana was to be married in five more days. The gray house at Orchard
Slope was in a turmoil of baking and brewing and boiling and stewing,
for there was to be a big, old-timey wedding. Anne, of course, was to
be bridesmaid, as had been arranged when they were twelve years old, and
Gilbert was coming from Kingsport to be best man. Anne was enjoying the
excitement of the various preparations, but under it all she carried a
little heartache. She was, in a sense, losing her dear old chum; Diana's
new home would be two miles from Green Gables, and the old constant
companionship could never be theirs again. Anne looked up at Diana's
light and thought how it had beaconed to her for many years; but soon it
would shine through the summer twilights no more. Two big, painful tears
welled up in her gray eyes.

"Oh," she thought, "how horrible it is that people have to grow up--and
marry--and CHANGE!"




Chapter XXIX

Diana's Wedding


"After all, the only real roses are the pink ones," said Anne, as she
tied white ribbon around Diana's bouquet in the westward-looking gable at
Orchard Slope. "They are the flowers of love and faith."

Diana was standing nervously in the middle of the room, arrayed in her
bridal white, her black curls frosted over with the film of her wedding
veil. Anne had draped that veil, in accordance with the sentimental
compact of years before.

"It's all pretty much as I used to imagine it long ago, when I wept over
your inevitable marriage and our consequent parting," she laughed. "You
are the bride of my dreams, Diana, with the 'lovely misty veil'; and
I am YOUR bridesmaid. But, alas! I haven't the puffed sleeves--though
these short lace ones are even prettier. Neither is my heart wholly
breaking nor do I exactly hate Fred."

"We are not really parting, Anne," protested Diana. "I'm not going far
away. We'll love each other just as much as ever. We've always kept that
'oath' of friendship we swore long ago, haven't we?"

"Yes. We've kept it faithfully. We've had a beautiful friendship, Diana.
We've never marred it by one quarrel or coolness or unkind word; and
I hope it will always be so. But things can't be quite the same after
this. You'll have other interests. I'll just be on the outside. But
'such is life' as Mrs. Rachel says. Mrs. Rachel has given you one of
her beloved knitted quilts of the 'tobacco stripe' pattern, and she says
when I am married she'll give me one, too."

"The mean thing about your getting married is that I won't be able to be
your bridesmaid," lamented Diana.

"I'm to be Phil's bridesmaid next June, when she marries Mr. Blake, and
then I must stop, for you know the proverb 'three times a bridesmaid,
never a bride,'" said Anne, peeping through the window over the pink
and snow of the blossoming orchard beneath. "Here comes the minister,
Diana."

"Oh, Anne," gasped Diana, suddenly turning very pale and beginning to
tremble. "Oh, Anne--I'm so nervous--I can't go through with it--Anne, I
know I'm going to faint."

"If you do I'll drag you down to the rainwater hogshed and drop you in,"
said Anne unsympathetically. "Cheer up, dearest. Getting married can't
be so very terrible when so many people survive the ceremony. See how
cool and composed I am, and take courage."

"Wait till your turn comes, Miss Anne. Oh, Anne, I hear father coming
upstairs. Give me my bouquet. Is my veil right? Am I very pale?"

"You look just lovely. Di, darling, kiss me good-bye for the last time.
Diana Barry will never kiss me again."

"Diana Wright will, though. There, mother's calling. Come."

Following the simple, old-fashioned way in vogue then, Anne went down to
the parlor on Gilbert's arm. They met at the top of the stairs for the
first time since they had left Kingsport, for Gilbert had arrived only
that day. Gilbert shook hands courteously. He was looking very well,
though, as Anne instantly noted, rather thin. He was not pale; there was
a flush on his cheek that had burned into it as Anne came along the hall
towards him, in her soft, white dress with lilies-of-the-valley in the
shining masses of her hair. As they entered the crowded parlor together
a little murmur of admiration ran around the room. "What a fine-looking
pair they are," whispered the impressible Mrs. Rachel to Marilla.

Fred ambled in alone, with a very red face, and then Diana swept in on
her father's arm. She did not faint, and nothing untoward occurred to
interrupt the ceremony. Feasting and merry-making followed; then, as the
evening waned, Fred and Diana drove away through the moonlight to their
new home, and Gilbert walked with Anne to Green Gables.

Something of their old comradeship had returned during the informal
mirth of the evening. Oh, it was nice to be walking over that well-known
road with Gilbert again!

The night was so very still that one should have been able to hear the
whisper of roses in blossom--the laughter of daisies--the piping of
grasses--many sweet sounds, all tangled up together. The beauty of
moonlight on familiar fields irradiated the world.

"Can't we take a ramble up Lovers' Lane before you go in?" asked Gilbert
as they crossed the bridge over the Lake of Shining Waters, in which the
moon lay like a great, drowned blossom of gold.

Anne assented readily. Lovers' Lane was a veritable path in a fairyland
that night--a shimmering, mysterious place, full of wizardry in the
white-woven enchantment of moonlight. There had been a time when such
a walk with Gilbert through Lovers' Lane would have been far too
dangerous. But Roy and Christine had made it very safe now. Anne found
herself thinking a good deal about Christine as she chatted lightly to
Gilbert. She had met her several times before leaving Kingsport, and had
been charmingly sweet to her. Christine had also been charmingly
sweet. Indeed, they were a most cordial pair. But for all that, their
acquaintance had not ripened into friendship. Evidently Christine was
not a kindred spirit.

"Are you going to be in Avonlea all summer?" asked Gilbert.

"No. I'm going down east to Valley Road next week. Esther Haythorne
wants me to teach for her through July and August. They have a summer
term in that school, and Esther isn't feeling well. So I'm going to
substitute for her. In one way I don't mind. Do you know, I'm beginning
to feel a little bit like a stranger in Avonlea now? It makes me
sorry--but it's true. It's quite appalling to see the number of
children who have shot up into big boys and girls--really young men and
women--these past two years. Half of my pupils are grown up. It makes me
feel awfully old to see them in the places you and I and our mates used
to fill."

Anne laughed and sighed. She felt very old and mature and wise--which
showed how young she was. She told herself that she longed greatly to go
back to those dear merry days when life was seen through a rosy mist
of hope and illusion, and possessed an indefinable something that had
passed away forever. Where was it now--the glory and the dream?

"'So wags the world away,'" quoted Gilbert practically, and a trifle
absently. Anne wondered if he were thinking of Christine. Oh, Avonlea
was going to be so lonely now--with Diana gone!




Chapter XXX

Mrs. Skinner's Romance


Anne stepped off the train at Valley Road station and looked about to
see if any one had come to meet her. She was to board with a certain
Miss Janet Sweet, but she saw no one who answered in the least to her
preconception of that lady, as formed from Esther's letter. The only
person in sight was an elderly woman, sitting in a wagon with mail bags
piled around her. Two hundred would have been a charitable guess at her
weight; her face was as round and red as a harvest-moon and almost
as featureless. She wore a tight, black, cashmere dress, made in the
fashion of ten years ago, a little dusty black straw hat trimmed with
bows of yellow ribbon, and faded black lace mits.

"Here, you," she called, waving her whip at Anne. "Are you the new
Valley Road schoolma'am?"

"Yes."

"Well, I thought so. Valley Road is noted for its good-looking
schoolma'ams, just as Millersville is noted for its humly ones. Janet
Sweet asked me this morning if I could bring you out. I said, 'Sartin
I kin, if she don't mind being scrunched up some. This rig of mine's
kinder small for the mail bags and I'm some heftier than Thomas!' Just
wait, miss, till I shift these bags a bit and I'll tuck you in somehow.
It's only two miles to Janet's. Her next-door neighbor's hired boy is
coming for your trunk tonight. My name is Skinner--Amelia Skinner."

Anne was eventually tucked in, exchanging amused smiles with herself
during the process.

"Jog along, black mare," commanded Mrs. Skinner, gathering up the reins
in her pudgy hands. "This is my first trip on the mail rowte. Thomas
wanted to hoe his turnips today so he asked me to come. So I jest sot
down and took a standing-up snack and started. I sorter like it. O'
course it's rather tejus. Part of the time I sits and thinks and the
rest I jest sits. Jog along, black mare. I want to git home airly.
Thomas is terrible lonesome when I'm away. You see, we haven't been
married very long."

"Oh!" said Anne politely.

"Just a month. Thomas courted me for quite a spell, though. It was real
romantic." Anne tried to picture Mrs. Skinner on speaking terms with
romance and failed.

"Oh?" she said again.

"Yes. Y'see, there was another man after me. Jog along, black mare. I'd
been a widder so long folks had given up expecting me to marry again.
But when my darter--she's a schoolma'am like you--went out West to teach
I felt real lonesome and wasn't nowise sot against the idea. Bime-by
Thomas began to come up and so did the other feller--William Obadiah
Seaman, his name was. For a long time I couldn't make up my mind which
of them to take, and they kep' coming and coming, and I kep' worrying.
Y'see, W.O. was rich--he had a fine place and carried considerable
style. He was by far the best match. Jog along, black mare."

"Why didn't you marry him?" asked Anne.

"Well, y'see, he didn't love me," answered Mrs. Skinner, solemnly.

Anne opened her eyes widely and looked at Mrs. Skinner. But there was
not a glint of humor on that lady's face. Evidently Mrs. Skinner saw
nothing amusing in her own case.

"He'd been a widder-man for three yers, and his sister kept house for
him. Then she got married and he just wanted some one to look after his
house. It was worth looking after, too, mind you that. It's a handsome
house. Jog along, black mare. As for Thomas, he was poor, and if his
house didn't leak in dry weather it was about all that could be said for
it, though it looks kind of pictureaskew. But, y'see, I loved Thomas,
and I didn't care one red cent for W.O. So I argued it out with myself.
'Sarah Crowe,' say I--my first was a Crowe--'you can marry your rich man
if you like but you won't be happy. Folks can't get along together in
this world without a little bit of love. You'd just better tie up to
Thomas, for he loves you and you love him and nothing else ain't going
to do you.' Jog along, black mare. So I told Thomas I'd take him. All
the time I was getting ready I never dared drive past W.O.'s place for
fear the sight of that fine house of his would put me in the swithers
again. But now I never think of it at all, and I'm just that comfortable
and happy with Thomas. Jog along, black mare."

"How did William Obadiah take it?" queried Anne.

"Oh, he rumpussed a bit. But he's going to see a skinny old maid in
Millersville now, and I guess she'll take him fast enough. She'll make
him a better wife than his first did. W.O. never wanted to marry her.
He just asked her to marry him 'cause his father wanted him to, never
dreaming but that she'd say 'no.' But mind you, she said 'yes.' There
was a predicament for you. Jog along, black mare. She was a great
housekeeper, but most awful mean. She wore the same bonnet for eighteen
years. Then she got a new one and W.O. met her on the road and didn't
know her. Jog along, black mare. I feel that I'd a narrer escape. I
might have married him and been most awful miserable, like my poor
cousin, Jane Ann. Jane Ann married a rich man she didn't care anything
about, and she hasn't the life of a dog. She come to see me last week
and says, says she, 'Sarah Skinner, I envy you. I'd rather live in a
little hut on the side of the road with a man I was fond of than in my
big house with the one I've got.' Jane Ann's man ain't such a bad sort,
nuther, though he's so contrary that he wears his fur coat when the
thermometer's at ninety. The only way to git him to do anything is to
coax him to do the opposite. But there ain't any love to smooth things
down and it's a poor way of living. Jog along, black mare. There's
Janet's place in the hollow--'Wayside,' she calls it. Quite
pictureaskew, ain't it? I guess you'll be glad to git out of this, with
all them mail bags jamming round you."

"Yes, but I have enjoyed my drive with you very much," said Anne
sincerely.

"Git away now!" said Mrs. Skinner, highly flattered. "Wait till I tell
Thomas that. He always feels dretful tickled when I git a compliment.
Jog along, black mare. Well, here we are. I hope you'll git on well in
the school, miss. There's a short cut to it through the ma'sh back of
Janet's. If you take that way be awful keerful. If you once got stuck in
that black mud you'd be sucked right down and never seen or heard tell
of again till the day of judgment, like Adam Palmer's cow. Jog along,
black mare."



Chapter XXXI

Anne to Philippa


"Anne Shirley to Philippa Gordon, greeting.

"Well-beloved, it's high time I was writing you. Here am I, installed
once more as a country 'schoolma'am' at Valley Road, boarding at
'Wayside,' the home of Miss Janet Sweet. Janet is a dear soul and very
nicelooking; tall, but not over-tall; stoutish, yet with a certain
restraint of outline suggestive of a thrifty soul who is not going to
be overlavish even in the matter of avoirdupois. She has a knot of soft,
crimpy, brown hair with a thread of gray in it, a sunny face with rosy
cheeks, and big, kind eyes as blue as forget-me-nots. Moreover, she is
one of those delightful, old-fashioned cooks who don't care a bit if
they ruin your digestion as long as they can give you feasts of fat
things.

"I like her; and she likes me--principally, it seems, because she had a
sister named Anne who died young.

"'I'm real glad to see you,' she said briskly, when I landed in her
yard. 'My, you don't look a mite like I expected. I was sure you'd be
dark--my sister Anne was dark. And here you're redheaded!'

"For a few minutes I thought I wasn't going to like Janet as much as I
had expected at first sight. Then I reminded myself that I really must
be more sensible than to be prejudiced against any one simply because
she called my hair red. Probably the word 'auburn' was not in Janet's
vocabulary at all.

"'Wayside' is a dear sort of little spot. The house is small and white,
set down in a delightful little hollow that drops away from the road.
Between road and house is an orchard and flower-garden all mixed
up together. The front door walk is bordered with quahog
clam-shells--'cow-hawks,' Janet calls them; there is Virginia Creeper
over the porch and moss on the roof. My room is a neat little spot 'off
the parlor'--just big enough for the bed and me. Over the head of my
bed there is a picture of Robby Burns standing at Highland Mary's
grave, shadowed by an enormous weeping willow tree. Robby's face is so
lugubrious that it is no wonder I have bad dreams. Why, the first night
I was here I dreamed I COULDN'T LAUGH.

"The parlor is tiny and neat. Its one window is so shaded by a huge
willow that the room has a grotto-like effect of emerald gloom. There
are wonderful tidies on the chairs, and gay mats on the floor, and books
and cards carefully arranged on a round table, and vases of dried grass
on the mantel-piece. Between the vases is a cheerful decoration of
preserved coffin plates--five in all, pertaining respectively to Janet's
father and mother, a brother, her sister Anne, and a hired man who died
here once! If I go suddenly insane some of these days 'know all men by
these presents' that those coffin-plates have caused it.

"But it's all delightful and I said so. Janet loved me for it, just
as she detested poor Esther because Esther had said so much shade was
unhygienic and had objected to sleeping on a feather bed. Now, I glory
in feather-beds, and the more unhygienic and feathery they are the more
I glory. Janet says it is such a comfort to see me eat; she had been
so afraid I would be like Miss Haythorne, who wouldn't eat anything but
fruit and hot water for breakfast and tried to make Janet give up frying
things. Esther is really a dear girl, but she is rather given to fads.
The trouble is that she hasn't enough imagination and HAS a tendency to
indigestion.

"Janet told me I could have the use of the parlor when any young men
called! I don't think there are many to call. I haven't seen a young man
in Valley Road yet, except the next-door hired boy--Sam Toliver, a very
tall, lank, tow-haired youth. He came over one evening recently and sat
for an hour on the garden fence, near the front porch where Janet and I
were doing fancy-work. The only remarks he volunteered in all that
time were, 'Hev a peppermint, miss! Dew now-fine thing for carARRH,
peppermints,' and, 'Powerful lot o' jump-grasses round here ternight.
Yep.'

"But there is a love affair going on here. It seems to be my fortune to
be mixed up, more or less actively, with elderly love affairs. Mr. and
Mrs. Irving always say that I brought about their marriage. Mrs. Stephen
Clark of Carmody persists in being most grateful to me for a suggestion
which somebody else would probably have made if I hadn't. I do really
think, though, that Ludovic Speed would never have got any further along
than placid courtship if I had not helped him and Theodora Dix out.

"In the present affair I am only a passive spectator. I've tried once
to help things along and made an awful mess of it. So I shall not meddle
again. I'll tell you all about it when we meet."




Chapter XXXII

Tea with Mrs. Douglas


On the first Thursday night of Anne's sojourn in Valley Road Janet asked
her to go to prayer-meeting. Janet blossomed out like a rose to attend
that prayer-meeting. She wore a pale-blue, pansy-sprinkled muslin dress
with more ruffles than one would ever have supposed economical Janet
could be guilty of, and a white leghorn hat with pink roses and three
ostrich feathers on it. Anne felt quite amazed. Later on, she found out
Janet's motive in so arraying herself--a motive as old as Eden.

Valley Road prayer-meetings seemed to be essentially feminine. There
were thirty-two women present, two half-grown boys, and one solitary
man, beside the minister. Anne found herself studying this man. He was
not handsome or young or graceful; he had remarkably long legs--so
long that he had to keep them coiled up under his chair to dispose of
them--and he was stoop-shouldered. His hands were big, his hair wanted
barbering, and his moustache was unkempt. But Anne thought she liked his
face; it was kind and honest and tender; there was something else in it,
too--just what, Anne found it hard to define. She finally concluded that
this man had suffered and been strong, and it had been made manifest
in his face. There was a sort of patient, humorous endurance in his
expression which indicated that he would go to the stake if need be, but
would keep on looking pleasant until he really had to begin squirming.

When prayer-meeting was over this man came up to Janet and said,

"May I see you home, Janet?"

Janet took his arm--"as primly and shyly as if she were no more than
sixteen, having her first escort home," Anne told the girls at Patty's
Place later on.

"Miss Shirley, permit me to introduce Mr. Douglas," she said stiffly.

Mr. Douglas nodded and said, "I was looking at you in prayer-meeting,
miss, and thinking what a nice little girl you were."

Such a speech from ninety-nine people out of a hundred would have
annoyed Anne bitterly; but the way in which Mr. Douglas said it made
her feel that she had received a very real and pleasing compliment.
She smiled appreciatively at him and dropped obligingly behind on the
moonlit road.

So Janet had a beau! Anne was delighted. Janet would make a paragon of a
wife--cheery, economical, tolerant, and a very queen of cooks. It would
be a flagrant waste on Nature's part to keep her a permanent old maid.

"John Douglas asked me to take you up to see his mother," said Janet
the next day. "She's bed-rid a lot of the time and never goes out of
the house. But she's powerful fond of company and always wants to see my
boarders. Can you go up this evening?"

Anne assented; but later in the day Mr. Douglas called on his mother's
behalf to invite them up to tea on Saturday evening.

"Oh, why didn't you put on your pretty pansy dress?" asked Anne, when
they left home. It was a hot day, and poor Janet, between her excitement
and her heavy black cashmere dress, looked as if she were being broiled
alive.

"Old Mrs. Douglas would think it terrible frivolous and unsuitable, I'm
afraid. John likes that dress, though," she added wistfully.

The old Douglas homestead was half a mile from "Wayside" cresting a
windy hill. The house itself was large and comfortable, old enough to be
dignified, and girdled with maple groves and orchards. There were big,
trim barns behind it, and everything bespoke prosperity. Whatever the
patient endurance in Mr. Douglas' face had meant it hadn't, so Anne
reflected, meant debts and duns.

John Douglas met them at the door and took them into the sitting-room,
where his mother was enthroned in an armchair.

Anne had expected old Mrs. Douglas to be tall and thin, because Mr.
Douglas was. Instead, she was a tiny scrap of a woman, with soft
pink cheeks, mild blue eyes, and a mouth like a baby's. Dressed in a
beautiful, fashionably-made black silk dress, with a fluffy white shawl
over her shoulders, and her snowy hair surmounted by a dainty lace cap,
she might have posed as a grandmother doll.

"How do you do, Janet dear?" she said sweetly. "I am so glad to see you
again, dear." She put up her pretty old face to be kissed. "And this is
our new teacher. I'm delighted to meet you. My son has been singing your
praises until I'm half jealous, and I'm sure Janet ought to be wholly
so."

Poor Janet blushed, Anne said something polite and conventional, and
then everybody sat down and made talk. It was hard work, even for Anne,
for nobody seemed at ease except old Mrs. Douglas, who certainly did not
find any difficulty in talking. She made Janet sit by her and
stroked her hand occasionally. Janet sat and smiled, looking horribly
uncomfortable in her hideous dress, and John Douglas sat without
smiling.

At the tea table Mrs. Douglas gracefully asked Janet to pour the tea.
Janet turned redder than ever but did it. Anne wrote a description of
that meal to Stella.

"We had cold tongue and chicken and strawberry preserves, lemon pie and
tarts and chocolate cake and raisin cookies and pound cake and fruit
cake--and a few other things, including more pie--caramel pie, I think
it was. After I had eaten twice as much as was good for me, Mrs. Douglas
sighed and said she feared she had nothing to tempt my appetite.

"'I'm afraid dear Janet's cooking has spoiled you for any other,' she
said sweetly. 'Of course nobody in Valley Road aspires to rival HER.
WON'T you have another piece of pie, Miss Shirley? You haven't eaten
ANYTHING.'

"Stella, I had eaten a helping of tongue and one of chicken, three
biscuits, a generous allowance of preserves, a piece of pie, a tart, and
a square of chocolate cake!"

After tea Mrs. Douglas smiled benevolently and told John to take "dear
Janet" out into the garden and get her some roses. "Miss Shirley will
keep me company while you are out--won't you?" she said plaintively. She
settled down in her armchair with a sigh.

"I am a very frail old woman, Miss Shirley. For over twenty years I've
been a great sufferer. For twenty long, weary years I've been dying by
inches."

"How painful!" said Anne, trying to be sympathetic and succeeding only
in feeling idiotic.

"There have been scores of nights when they've thought I could never
live to see the dawn," went on Mrs. Douglas solemnly. "Nobody knows what
I've gone through--nobody can know but myself. Well, it can't last very
much longer now. My weary pilgrimage will soon be over, Miss Shirley.
It is a great comfort to me that John will have such a good wife to look
after him when his mother is gone--a great comfort, Miss Shirley."

"Janet is a lovely woman," said Anne warmly.

"Lovely! A beautiful character," assented Mrs. Douglas. "And a perfect
housekeeper--something I never was. My health would not permit it, Miss
Shirley. I am indeed thankful that John has made such a wise choice. I
hope and believe that he will be happy. He is my only son, Miss Shirley,
and his happiness lies very near my heart."

"Of course," said Anne stupidly. For the first time in her life she was
stupid. Yet she could not imagine why. She seemed to have absolutely
nothing to say to this sweet, smiling, angelic old lady who was patting
her hand so kindly.

"Come and see me soon again, dear Janet," said Mrs. Douglas lovingly,
when they left. "You don't come half often enough. But then I suppose
John will be bringing you here to stay all the time one of these days."
Anne, happening to glance at John Douglas, as his mother spoke, gave a
positive start of dismay. He looked as a tortured man might look when
his tormentors gave the rack the last turn of possible endurance. She
felt sure he must be ill and hurried poor blushing Janet away.

"Isn't old Mrs. Douglas a sweet woman?" asked Janet, as they went down
the road.

"M--m," answered Anne absently. She was wondering why John Douglas had
looked so.

"She's been a terrible sufferer," said Janet feelingly. "She takes
terrible spells. It keeps John all worried up. He's scared to leave home
for fear his mother will take a spell and nobody there but the hired
girl."




Chapter XXXIII

"He Just Kept Coming and Coming"


Three days later Anne came home from school and found Janet crying.
Tears and Janet seemed so incongruous that Anne was honestly alarmed.

"Oh, what is the matter?" she cried anxiously.

"I'm--I'm forty today," sobbed Janet.

"Well, you were nearly that yesterday and it didn't hurt," comforted
Anne, trying not to smile.

"But--but," went on Janet with a big gulp, "John Douglas won't ask me to
marry him."

"Oh, but he will," said Anne lamely. "You must give him time, Janet

"Time!" said Janet with indescribable scorn. "He has had twenty years.
How much time does he want?"

"Do you mean that John Douglas has been coming to see you for twenty
years?"

"He has. And he has never so much as mentioned marriage to me. And I
don't believe he ever will now. I've never said a word to a mortal about
it, but it seems to me I've just got to talk it out with some one at
last or go crazy. John Douglas begun to go with me twenty years ago,
before mother died. Well, he kept coming and coming, and after a spell I
begun making quilts and things; but he never said anything about getting
married, only just kept coming and coming. There wasn't anything I could
do. Mother died when we'd been going together for eight years. I thought
he maybe would speak out then, seeing as I was left alone in the world.
He was real kind and feeling, and did everything he could for me, but
he never said marry. And that's the way it has been going on ever since.
People blame ME for it. They say I won't marry him because his mother is
so sickly and I don't want the bother of waiting on her. Why, I'd LOVE
to wait on John's mother! But I let them think so. I'd rather they'd
blame me than pity me! It's so dreadful humiliating that John won't ask
me. And WHY won't he? Seems to me if I only knew his reason I wouldn't
mind it so much."

"Perhaps his mother doesn't want him to marry anybody," suggested Anne.

"Oh, she does. She's told me time and again that she'd love to see John
settled before her time comes. She's always giving him hints--you heard
her yourself the other day. I thought I'd ha' gone through the floor."

"It's beyond me," said Anne helplessly. She thought of Ludovic Speed.
But the cases were not parallel. John Douglas was not a man of Ludovic's
type.

"You should show more spirit, Janet," she went on resolutely. "Why
didn't you send him about his business long ago?"

"I couldn't," said poor Janet pathetically. "You see, Anne, I've always
been awful fond of John. He might just as well keep coming as not, for
there was never anybody else I'd want, so it didn't matter."

"But it might have made him speak out like a man," urged Anne.

Janet shook her head.

"No, I guess not. I was afraid to try, anyway, for fear he'd think I
meant it and just go. I suppose I'm a poor-spirited creature, but that
is how I feel. And I can't help it."

"Oh, you COULD help it, Janet. It isn't too late yet. Take a firm stand.
Let that man know you are not going to endure his shillyshallying any
longer. I'LL back you up."

"I dunno," said Janet hopelessly. "I dunno if I could ever get up enough
spunk. Things have drifted so long. But I'll think it over."

Anne felt that she was disappointed in John Douglas. She had liked him
so well, and she had not thought him the sort of man who would play fast
and loose with a woman's feelings for twenty years. He certainly should
be taught a lesson, and Anne felt vindictively that she would enjoy
seeing the process. Therefore she was delighted when Janet told her, as
they were going to prayer-meeting the next night, that she meant to show
some "sperrit."

"I'll let John Douglas see I'm not going to be trodden on any longer."

"You are perfectly right," said Anne emphatically.

When prayer-meeting was over John Douglas came up with his usual
request. Janet looked frightened but resolute.

"No, thank you," she said icily. "I know the road home pretty well
alone. I ought to, seeing I've been traveling it for forty years. So you
needn't trouble yourself, MR. Douglas."

Anne was looking at John Douglas; and, in that brilliant moonlight,
she saw the last twist of the rack again. Without a word he turned and
strode down the road.

"Stop! Stop!" Anne called wildly after him, not caring in the least for
the other dumbfounded onlookers. "Mr. Douglas, stop! Come back."

John Douglas stopped but he did not come back. Anne flew down the road,
caught his arm and fairly dragged him back to Janet.

"You must come back," she said imploringly. "It's all a mistake, Mr.
Douglas--all my fault. I made Janet do it. She didn't want to--but it's
all right now, isn't it, Janet?"

Without a word Janet took his arm and walked away. Anne followed them
meekly home and slipped in by the back door.

"Well, you are a nice person to back me up," said Janet sarcastically.

"I couldn't help it, Janet," said Anne repentantly. "I just felt as if I
had stood by and seen murder done. I HAD to run after him."

"Oh, I'm just as glad you did. When I saw John Douglas making off down
that road I just felt as if every little bit of joy and happiness that
was left in my life was going with him. It was an awful feeling."

"Did he ask you why you did it?" asked Anne.

"No, he never said a word about it," replied Janet dully.




Chapter XXXIV

John Douglas Speaks at Last


Anne was not without a feeble hope that something might come of it after
all. But nothing did. John Douglas came and took Janet driving, and
walked home from prayer-meeting with her, as he had been doing for
twenty years, and as he seemed likely to do for twenty years more. The
summer waned. Anne taught her school and wrote letters and studied a
little. Her walks to and from school were pleasant. She always went by
way of the swamp; it was a lovely place--a boggy soil, green with the
greenest of mossy hillocks; a silvery brook meandered through it and
spruces stood erectly, their boughs a-trail with gray-green mosses,
their roots overgrown with all sorts of woodland lovelinesses.

Nevertheless, Anne found life in Valley Road a little monotonous. To be
sure, there was one diverting incident.

She had not seen the lank, tow-headed Samuel of the peppermints since
the evening of his call, save for chance meetings on the road. But one
warm August night he appeared, and solemnly seated himself on the rustic
bench by the porch. He wore his usual working habiliments, consisting of
varipatched trousers, a blue jean shirt, out at the elbows, and a ragged
straw hat. He was chewing a straw and he kept on chewing it while he
looked solemnly at Anne. Anne laid her book aside with a sigh and took
up her doily. Conversation with Sam was really out of the question.

After a long silence Sam suddenly spoke.

"I'm leaving over there," he said abruptly, waving his straw in the
direction of the neighboring house.

"Oh, are you?" said Anne politely.

"Yep."

"And where are you going now?"

"Wall, I've been thinking some of gitting a place of my own. There's
one that'd suit me over at Millersville. But ef I rents it I'll want a
woman."

"I suppose so," said Anne vaguely.

"Yep."

There was another long silence. Finally Sam removed his straw again and
said,

"Will yeh hev me?"

"Wh--a--t!" gasped Anne.

"Will yeh hev me?"

"Do you mean--MARRY you?" queried poor Anne feebly.

"Yep."

"Why, I'm hardly acquainted with you," cried Anne indignantly.

"But yeh'd git acquainted with me after we was married," said Sam.

Anne gathered up her poor dignity.

"Certainly I won't marry you," she said haughtily.

"Wall, yeh might do worse," expostulated Sam. "I'm a good worker and
I've got some money in the bank."

"Don't speak of this to me again. Whatever put such an idea into your
head?" said Anne, her sense of humor getting the better of her wrath. It
was such an absurd situation.

"Yeh're a likely-looking girl and hev a right-smart way o' stepping,"
said Sam. "I don't want no lazy woman. Think it over. I won't change my
mind yit awhile. Wall, I must be gitting. Gotter milk the cows."

Anne's illusions concerning proposals had suffered so much of late years
that there were few of them left. So she could laugh wholeheartedly over
this one, not feeling any secret sting. She mimicked poor Sam to Janet
that night, and both of them laughed immoderately over his plunge into
sentiment.

One afternoon, when Anne's sojourn in Valley Road was drawing to a
close, Alec Ward came driving down to "Wayside" in hot haste for Janet.

"They want you at the Douglas place quick," he said. "I really believe
old Mrs. Douglas is going to die at last, after pretending to do it for
twenty years."

Janet ran to get her hat. Anne asked if Mrs. Douglas was worse than
usual.

"She's not half as bad," said Alec solemnly, "and that's what makes me
think it's serious. Other times she'd be screaming and throwing herself
all over the place. This time she's lying still and mum. When Mrs.
Douglas is mum she is pretty sick, you bet."

"You don't like old Mrs. Douglas?" said Anne curiously.

"I like cats as IS cats. I don't like cats as is women," was Alec's
cryptic reply.

Janet came home in the twilight.

"Mrs. Douglas is dead," she said wearily. "She died soon after I got
there. She just spoke to me once--'I suppose you'll marry John now?' she
said. It cut me to the heart, Anne. To think John's own mother thought
I wouldn't marry him because of her! I couldn't say a word either--there
were other women there. I was thankful John had gone out."

Janet began to cry drearily. But Anne brewed her a hot drink of ginger
tea to her comforting. To be sure, Anne discovered later on that she
had used white pepper instead of ginger; but Janet never knew the
difference.

The evening after the funeral Janet and Anne were sitting on the front
porch steps at sunset. The wind had fallen asleep in the pinelands and
lurid sheets of heat-lightning flickered across the northern skies.
Janet wore her ugly black dress and looked her very worst, her eyes and
nose red from crying. They talked little, for Janet seemed faintly
to resent Anne's efforts to cheer her up. She plainly preferred to be
miserable.

Suddenly the gate-latch clicked and John Douglas strode into the garden.
He walked towards them straight over the geranium bed. Janet stood
up. So did Anne. Anne was a tall girl and wore a white dress; but John
Douglas did not see her.

"Janet," he said, "will you marry me?"

The words burst out as if they had been wanting to be said for twenty
years and MUST be uttered now, before anything else.

Janet's face was so red from crying that it couldn't turn any redder, so
it turned a most unbecoming purple.

"Why didn't you ask me before?" she said slowly.

"I couldn't. She made me promise not to--mother made me promise not to.
Nineteen years ago she took a terrible spell. We thought she couldn't
live through it. She implored me to promise not to ask you to marry me
while she was alive. I didn't want to promise such a thing, even though
we all thought she couldn't live very long--the doctor only gave her
six months. But she begged it on her knees, sick and suffering. I had to
promise."

"What had your mother against me?" cried Janet.

"Nothing--nothing. She just didn't want another woman--ANY woman--there
while she was living. She said if I didn't promise she'd die right
there and I'd have killed her. So I promised. And she's held me to that
promise ever since, though I've gone on my knees to her in my turn to
beg her to let me off."

"Why didn't you tell me this?" asked Janet chokingly. "If I'd only
KNOWN! Why didn't you just tell me?"

"She made me promise I wouldn't tell a soul," said John hoarsely.
"She swore me to it on the Bible; Janet, I'd never have done it if I'd
dreamed it was to be for so long. Janet, you'll never know what I've
suffered these nineteen years. I know I've made you suffer, too, but
you'll marry me for all, won't you, Janet? Oh, Janet, won't you? I've
come as soon as I could to ask you."

At this moment the stupefied Anne came to her senses and realized that
she had no business to be there. She slipped away and did not see Janet
until the next morning, when the latter told her the rest of the story.

"That cruel, relentless, deceitful old woman!" cried Anne.

"Hush--she's dead," said Janet solemnly. "If she wasn't--but she IS.
So we mustn't speak evil of her. But I'm happy at last, Anne. And I
wouldn't have minded waiting so long a bit if I'd only known why."

"When are you to be married?"

"Next month. Of course it will be very quiet. I suppose people will talk
terrible. They'll say I made enough haste to snap John up as soon as his
poor mother was out of the way. John wanted to let them know the truth
but I said, 'No, John; after all she was your mother, and we'll keep the
secret between us, and not cast any shadow on her memory. I don't mind
what people say, now that I know the truth myself. It don't matter a
mite. Let it all be buried with the dead' says I to him. So I coaxed him
round to agree with me."

"You're much more forgiving than I could ever be," Anne said, rather
crossly.

"You'll feel differently about a good many things when you get to be my
age," said Janet tolerantly. "That's one of the things we learn as we
grow older--how to forgive. It comes easier at forty than it did at
twenty."




Chapter XXXV

The Last Redmond Year Opens


"Here we are, all back again, nicely sunburned and rejoicing as a strong
man to run a race," said Phil, sitting down on a suitcase with a sigh of
pleasure. "Isn't it jolly to see this dear old Patty's Place again--and
Aunty--and the cats? Rusty has lost another piece of ear, hasn't he?"

"Rusty would be the nicest cat in the world if he had no ears at all,"
declared Anne loyally from her trunk, while Rusty writhed about her lap
in a frenzy of welcome.

"Aren't you glad to see us back, Aunty?" demanded Phil.

"Yes. But I wish you'd tidy things up," said Aunt Jamesina plaintively,
looking at the wilderness of trunks and suitcases by which the four
laughing, chattering girls were surrounded. "You can talk just as well
later on. Work first and then play used to be my motto when I was a
girl."

"Oh, we've just reversed that in this generation, Aunty. OUR motto is
play your play and then dig in. You can do your work so much better if
you've had a good bout of play first."

"If you are going to marry a minister," said Aunt Jamesina, picking up
Joseph and her knitting and resigning herself to the inevitable with the
charming grace that made her the queen of housemothers, "you will have
to give up such expressions as 'dig in.'"

"Why?" moaned Phil. "Oh, why must a minister's wife be supposed to utter
only prunes and prisms? I shan't. Everybody on Patterson Street uses
slang--that is to say, metaphorical language--and if I didn't they would
think me insufferably proud and stuck up."

"Have you broken the news to your family?" asked Priscilla, feeding the
Sarah-cat bits from her lunchbasket.

Phil nodded.

"How did they take it?"

"Oh, mother rampaged. But I stood rockfirm--even I, Philippa Gordon, who
never before could hold fast to anything. Father was calmer. Father's
own daddy was a minister, so you see he has a soft spot in his heart for
the cloth. I had Jo up to Mount Holly, after mother grew calm, and
they both loved him. But mother gave him some frightful hints in every
conversation regarding what she had hoped for me. Oh, my vacation
pathway hasn't been exactly strewn with roses, girls dear. But--I've won
out and I've got Jo. Nothing else matters."

"To you," said Aunt Jamesina darkly.

"Nor to Jo, either," retorted Phil. "You keep on pitying him. Why, pray?
I think he's to be envied. He's getting brains, beauty, and a heart of
gold in ME."

"It's well we know how to take your speeches," said Aunt Jamesina
patiently. "I hope you don't talk like that before strangers. What would
they think?"

"Oh, I don't want to know what they think. I don't want to see myself as
others see me. I'm sure it would be horribly uncomfortable most of the
time. I don't believe Burns was really sincere in that prayer, either."

"Oh, I daresay we all pray for some things that we really don't want, if
we were only honest enough to look into our hearts," owned Aunt Jamesina
candidly. "I've a notion that such prayers don't rise very far. _I_ used
to pray that I might be enabled to forgive a certain person, but I know
now I really didn't want to forgive her. When I finally got that I DID
want to I forgave her without having to pray about it."

"I can't picture you as being unforgiving for long," said Stella.

"Oh, I used to be. But holding spite doesn't seem worth while when you
get along in years."

"That reminds me," said Anne, and told the tale of John and Janet.

"And now tell us about that romantic scene you hinted so darkly at in
one of your letters," demanded Phil.

Anne acted out Samuel's proposal with great spirit. The girls shrieked
with laughter and Aunt Jamesina smiled.

"It isn't in good taste to make fun of your beaux," she said severely;
"but," she added calmly, "I always did it myself."

"Tell us about your beaux, Aunty," entreated Phil. "You must have had
any number of them."

"They're not in the past tense," retorted Aunt Jamesina. "I've got them
yet. There are three old widowers at home who have been casting sheep's
eyes at me for some time. You children needn't think you own all the
romance in the world."

"Widowers and sheep's eyes don't sound very romantic, Aunty."

"Well, no; but young folks aren't always romantic either. Some of my
beaux certainly weren't. I used to laugh at them scandalous, poor boys.
There was Jim Elwood--he was always in a sort of day-dream--never seemed
to sense what was going on. He didn't wake up to the fact that I'd said
'no' till a year after I'd said it. When he did get married his wife
fell out of the sleigh one night when they were driving home from church
and he never missed her. Then there was Dan Winston. He knew too much.
He knew everything in this world and most of what is in the next. He
could give you an answer to any question, even if you asked him when the
Judgment Day was to be. Milton Edwards was real nice and I liked him but
I didn't marry him. For one thing, he took a week to get a joke through
his head, and for another he never asked me. Horatio Reeve was the most
interesting beau I ever had. But when he told a story he dressed it up
so that you couldn't see it for frills. I never could decide whether he
was lying or just letting his imagination run loose."

"And what about the others, Aunty?"

"Go away and unpack," said Aunt Jamesina, waving Joseph at them by
mistake for a needle. "The others were too nice to make fun of. I shall
respect their memory. There's a box of flowers in your room, Anne. They
came about an hour ago."

After the first week the girls of Patty's Place settled down to a steady
grind of study; for this was their last year at Redmond and graduation
honors must be fought for persistently. Anne devoted herself to English,
Priscilla pored over classics, and Philippa pounded away at Mathematics.
Sometimes they grew tired, sometimes they felt discouraged, sometimes
nothing seemed worth the struggle for it. In one such mood Stella
wandered up to the blue room one rainy November evening. Anne sat on the
floor in a little circle of light cast by the lamp beside her, amid a
surrounding snow of crumpled manuscript.

"What in the world are you doing?"

"Just looking over some old Story Club yarns. I wanted something to
cheer AND inebriate. I'd studied until the world seemed azure. So I came
up here and dug these out of my trunk. They are so drenched in tears and
tragedy that they are excruciatingly funny."

"I'm blue and discouraged myself," said Stella, throwing herself on the
couch. "Nothing seems worthwhile. My very thoughts are old. I've thought
them all before. What is the use of living after all, Anne?"

"Honey, it's just brain fag that makes us feel that way, and the
weather. A pouring rainy night like this, coming after a hard day's
grind, would squelch any one but a Mark Tapley. You know it IS
worthwhile to live."

"Oh, I suppose so. But I can't prove it to myself just now."

"Just think of all the great and noble souls who have lived and worked
in the world," said Anne dreamily. "Isn't it worthwhile to come after
them and inherit what they won and taught? Isn't it worthwhile to think
we can share their inspiration? And then, all the great souls that will
come in the future? Isn't it worthwhile to work a little and prepare the
way for them--make just one step in their path easier?"

"Oh, my mind agrees with you, Anne. But my soul remains doleful and
uninspired. I'm always grubby and dingy on rainy nights."

"Some nights I like the rain--I like to lie in bed and hear it pattering
on the roof and drifting through the pines."

"I like it when it stays on the roof," said Stella. "It doesn't always.
I spent a gruesome night in an old country farmhouse last summer. The
roof leaked and the rain came pattering down on my bed. There was no
poetry in THAT. I had to get up in the 'mirk midnight' and chivy round
to pull the bedstead out of the drip--and it was one of those solid,
old-fashioned beds that weigh a ton--more or less. And then that
drip-drop, drip-drop kept up all night until my nerves just went to
pieces. You've no idea what an eerie noise a great drop of rain falling
with a mushy thud on a bare floor makes in the night. It sounds like
ghostly footsteps and all that sort of thing. What are you laughing
over, Anne?"

"These stories. As Phil would say they are killing--in more senses than
one, for everybody died in them. What dazzlingly lovely heroines
we had--and how we dressed them!

"Silks--satins--velvets--jewels--laces--they never wore anything else.
Here is one of Jane Andrews' stories depicting her heroine as sleeping
in a beautiful white satin nightdress trimmed with seed pearls."

"Go on," said Stella. "I begin to feel that life is worth living as long
as there's a laugh in it."

"Here's one I wrote. My heroine is disporting herself at a ball
'glittering from head to foot with large diamonds of the first water.'
But what booted beauty or rich attire? 'The paths of glory lead but to
the grave.' They must either be murdered or die of a broken heart. There
was no escape for them."

"Let me read some of your stories."

"Well, here's my masterpiece. Note its cheerful title--'My Graves.' I
shed quarts of tears while writing it, and the other girls shed gallons
while I read it. Jane Andrews' mother scolded her frightfully because
she had so many handkerchiefs in the wash that week. It's a harrowing
tale of the wanderings of a Methodist minister's wife. I made her a
Methodist because it was necessary that she should wander. She buried a
child every place she lived in. There were nine of them and their
graves were severed far apart, ranging from Newfoundland to Vancouver. I
described the children, pictured their several death beds, and detailed
their tombstones and epitaphs. I had intended to bury the whole nine
but when I had disposed of eight my invention of horrors gave out and I
permitted the ninth to live as a hopeless cripple."

While Stella read My Graves, punctuating its tragic paragraphs with
chuckles, and Rusty slept the sleep of a just cat who has been out all
night curled up on a Jane Andrews tale of a beautiful maiden of fifteen
who went to nurse in a leper colony--of course dying of the loathsome
disease finally--Anne glanced over the other manuscripts and recalled
the old days at Avonlea school when the members of the Story Club,
sitting under the spruce trees or down among the ferns by the brook, had
written them. What fun they had had! How the sunshine and mirth of those
olden summers returned as she read. Not all the glory that was Greece
or the grandeur that was Rome could weave such wizardry as those funny,
tearful tales of the Story Club. Among the manuscripts Anne found one
written on sheets of wrapping paper. A wave of laughter filled her
gray eyes as she recalled the time and place of its genesis. It was the
sketch she had written the day she fell through the roof of the Cobb
duckhouse on the Tory Road.

Anne glanced over it, then fell to reading it intently. It was a little
dialogue between asters and sweet-peas, wild canaries in the lilac bush,
and the guardian spirit of the garden. After she had read it, she
sat, staring into space; and when Stella had gone she smoothed out the
crumpled manuscript.

"I believe I will," she said resolutely.




Chapter XXXVI

The Gardners'Call


"Here is a letter with an Indian stamp for you, Aunt Jimsie," said Phil.
"Here are three for Stella, and two for Pris, and a glorious fat one for
me from Jo. There's nothing for you, Anne, except a circular."

Nobody noticed Anne's flush as she took the thin letter Phil tossed her
carelessly. But a few minutes later Phil looked up to see a transfigured
Anne.

"Honey, what good thing has happened?"

"The Youth's Friend has accepted a little sketch I sent them a fortnight
ago," said Anne, trying hard to speak as if she were accustomed to
having sketches accepted every mail, but not quite succeeding.

"Anne Shirley! How glorious! What was it? When is it to be published?
Did they pay you for it?"

"Yes; they've sent a check for ten dollars, and the editor writes that
he would like to see more of my work. Dear man, he shall. It was an
old sketch I found in my box. I re-wrote it and sent it in--but I never
really thought it could be accepted because it had no plot," said Anne,
recalling the bitter experience of Averil's Atonement.

"What are you going to do with that ten dollars, Anne? Let's all go up
town and get drunk," suggested Phil.

"I AM going to squander it in a wild soulless revel of some sort,"
declared Anne gaily. "At all events it isn't tainted money--like the
check I got for that horrible Reliable Baking Powder story. I spent IT
usefully for clothes and hated them every time I put them on."

"Think of having a real live author at Patty's Place," said Priscilla.

"It's a great responsibility," said Aunt Jamesina solemnly.

"Indeed it is," agreed Pris with equal solemnity. "Authors are kittle
cattle. You never know when or how they will break out. Anne may make
copy of us."

"I meant that the ability to write for the Press was a great
responsibility," said Aunt Jamesina severely, "and I hope Anne realizes,
it. My daughter used to write stories before she went to the foreign
field, but now she has turned her attention to higher things. She used
to say her motto was 'Never write a line you would be ashamed to read
at your own funeral.' You'd better take that for yours, Anne, if you are
going to embark in literature. Though, to be sure," added Aunt Jamesina
perplexedly, "Elizabeth always used to laugh when she said it. She
always laughed so much that I don't know how she ever came to decide
on being a missionary. I'm thankful she did--I prayed that she
might--but--I wish she hadn't."

Then Aunt Jamesina wondered why those giddy girls all laughed.

Anne's eyes shone all that day; literary ambitions sprouted and budded
in her brain; their exhilaration accompanied her to Jennie Cooper's
walking party, and not even the sight of Gilbert and Christine, walking
just ahead of her and Roy, could quite subdue the sparkle of her starry
hopes. Nevertheless, she was not so rapt from things of earth as to be
unable to notice that Christine's walk was decidedly ungraceful.

"But I suppose Gilbert looks only at her face. So like a man," thought
Anne scornfully.

"Shall you be home Saturday afternoon?" asked Roy.

"Yes."

"My mother and sisters are coming to call on you," said Roy quietly.

Something went over Anne which might be described as a thrill, but it
was hardly a pleasant one. She had never met any of Roy's family; she
realized the significance of his statement; and it had, somehow, an
irrevocableness about it that chilled her.

"I shall be glad to see them," she said flatly; and then wondered if she
really would be glad. She ought to be, of course. But would it not be
something of an ordeal? Gossip had filtered to Anne regarding the light
in which the Gardners viewed the "infatuation" of son and brother. Roy
must have brought pressure to bear in the matter of this call. Anne
knew she would be weighed in the balance. From the fact that they had
consented to call she understood that, willingly or unwillingly, they
regarded her as a possible member of their clan.

"I shall just be myself. I shall not TRY to make a good impression,"
thought Anne loftily. But she was wondering what dress she would better
wear Saturday afternoon, and if the new style of high hair-dressing
would suit her better than the old; and the walking party was rather
spoiled for her. By night she had decided that she would wear her brown
chiffon on Saturday, but would do her hair low.

Friday afternoon none of the girls had classes at Redmond. Stella took
the opportunity to write a paper for the Philomathic Society, and was
sitting at the table in the corner of the living-room with an untidy
litter of notes and manuscript on the floor around her. Stella always
vowed she never could write anything unless she threw each sheet down as
she completed it. Anne, in her flannel blouse and serge skirt, with her
hair rather blown from her windy walk home, was sitting squarely in the
middle of the floor, teasing the Sarah-cat with a wishbone. Joseph and
Rusty were both curled up in her lap. A warm plummy odor filled the
whole house, for Priscilla was cooking in the kitchen. Presently she
came in, enshrouded in a huge work-apron, with a smudge of flour on her
nose, to show Aunt Jamesina the chocolate cake she had just iced.

At this auspicious moment the knocker sounded. Nobody paid any attention
to it save Phil, who sprang up and opened it, expecting a boy with the
hat she had bought that morning. On the doorstep stood Mrs. Gardner and
her daughters.

Anne scrambled to her feet somehow, emptying two indignant cats out of
her lap as she did so, and mechanically shifting her wishbone from her
right hand to her left. Priscilla, who would have had to cross the room
to reach the kitchen door, lost her head, wildly plunged the chocolate
cake under a cushion on the inglenook sofa, and dashed upstairs. Stella
began feverishly gathering up her manuscript. Only Aunt Jamesina and
Phil remained normal. Thanks to them, everybody was soon sitting at
ease, even Anne. Priscilla came down, apronless and smudgeless, Stella
reduced her corner to decency, and Phil saved the situation by a stream
of ready small talk.

Mrs. Gardner was tall and thin and handsome, exquisitely gowned, cordial
with a cordiality that seemed a trifle forced. Aline Gardner was a
younger edition of her mother, lacking the cordiality. She endeavored
to be nice, but succeeded only in being haughty and patronizing. Dorothy
Gardner was slim and jolly and rather tomboyish. Anne knew she was Roy's
favorite sister and warmed to her. She would have looked very much
like Roy if she had had dreamy dark eyes instead of roguish hazel ones.
Thanks to her and Phil, the call really went off very well, except for
a slight sense of strain in the atmosphere and two rather untoward
incidents. Rusty and Joseph, left to themselves, began a game of chase,
and sprang madly into Mrs. Gardner's silken lap and out of it in their
wild career. Mrs. Gardner lifted her lorgnette and gazed after their
flying forms as if she had never seen cats before, and Anne, choking
back slightly nervous laughter, apologized as best she could.

"You are fond of cats?" said Mrs. Gardner, with a slight intonation of
tolerant wonder.

Anne, despite her affection for Rusty, was not especially fond of cats,
but Mrs. Gardner's tone annoyed her. Inconsequently she remembered
that Mrs. John Blythe was so fond of cats that she kept as many as her
husband would allow.

"They ARE adorable animals, aren't they?" she said wickedly.

"I have never liked cats," said Mrs. Gardner remotely.

"I love them," said Dorothy. "They are so nice and selfish. Dogs are
TOO good and unselfish. They make me feel uncomfortable. But cats are
gloriously human."

"You have two delightful old china dogs there. May I look at them
closely?" said Aline, crossing the room towards the fireplace and
thereby becoming the unconscious cause of the other accident. Picking up
Magog, she sat down on the cushion under which was secreted Priscilla's
chocolate cake. Priscilla and Anne exchanged agonized glances but
could do nothing. The stately Aline continued to sit on the cushion and
discuss china dogs until the time of departure.

Dorothy lingered behind a moment to squeeze Anne's hand and whisper
impulsively.

"I KNOW you and I are going to be chums. Oh, Roy has told me all about
you. I'm the only one of the family he tells things to, poor boy--nobody
COULD confide in mamma and Aline, you know. What glorious times you
girls must have here! Won't you let me come often and have a share in
them?"

"Come as often as you like," Anne responded heartily, thankful that one
of Roy's sisters was likable. She would never like Aline, so much was
certain; and Aline would never like her, though Mrs. Gardner might be
won. Altogether, Anne sighed with relief when the ordeal was over.

     "'Of all sad words of tongue or pen
     The saddest are it might have been,'"

quoted Priscilla tragically, lifting the cushion. "This cake is now what
you might call a flat failure. And the cushion is likewise ruined. Never
tell me that Friday isn't unlucky."

"People who send word they are coming on Saturday shouldn't come on
Friday," said Aunt Jamesina.

"I fancy it was Roy's mistake," said Phil. "That boy isn't really
responsible for what he says when he talks to Anne. Where IS Anne?"

Anne had gone upstairs. She felt oddly like crying. But she made herself
laugh instead. Rusty and Joseph had been TOO awful! And Dorothy WAS a
dear.




Chapter XXXVII

Full-fledged B.A.'s


"I wish I were dead, or that it were tomorrow night," groaned Phil.

"If you live long enough both wishes will come true," said Anne calmly.

"It's easy for you to be serene. You're at home in Philosophy. I'm
not--and when I think of that horrible paper tomorrow I quail. If I
should fail in it what would Jo say?"

"You won't fail. How did you get on in Greek today?"

"I don't know. Perhaps it was a good paper and perhaps it was bad enough
to make Homer turn over in his grave. I've studied and mulled over
notebooks until I'm incapable of forming an opinion of anything. How
thankful little Phil will be when all this examinating is over."

"Examinating? I never heard such a word."

"Well, haven't I as good a right to make a word as any one else?"
demanded Phil.

"Words aren't made--they grow," said Anne.

"Never mind--I begin faintly to discern clear water ahead where no
examination breakers loom. Girls, do you--can you realize that our
Redmond Life is almost over?"

"I can't," said Anne, sorrowfully. "It seems just yesterday that Pris
and I were alone in that crowd of Freshmen at Redmond. And now we are
Seniors in our final examinations."

"'Potent, wise, and reverend Seniors,'" quoted Phil. "Do you suppose we
really are any wiser than when we came to Redmond?"

"You don't act as if you were by times," said Aunt Jamesina severely.

"Oh, Aunt Jimsie, haven't we been pretty good girls, take us by and
large, these three winters you've mothered us?" pleaded Phil.

"You've been four of the dearest, sweetest, goodest girls that ever went
together through college," averred Aunt Jamesina, who never spoiled a
compliment by misplaced economy.

"But I mistrust you haven't any too much sense yet. It's not to be
expected, of course. Experience teaches sense. You can't learn it in a
college course. You've been to college four years and I never was, but I
know heaps more than you do, young ladies."

     "'There are lots of things that never go by rule,
     There's a powerful pile o' knowledge
     That you never get at college,
     There are heaps of things you never learn at school,'"

quoted Stella.

"Have you learned anything at Redmond except dead languages and geometry
and such trash?" queried Aunt Jamesina.

"Oh, yes. I think we have, Aunty," protested Anne.

"We've learned the truth of what Professor Woodleigh told us last
Philomathic," said Phil. "He said, 'Humor is the spiciest condiment in
the feast of existence. Laugh at your mistakes but learn from them, joke
over your troubles but gather strength from them, make a jest of
your difficulties but overcome them.' Isn't that worth learning, Aunt
Jimsie?"

"Yes, it is, dearie. When you've learned to laugh at the things that
should be laughed at, and not to laugh at those that shouldn't, you've
got wisdom and understanding."

"What have you got out of your Redmond course, Anne?" murmured Priscilla
aside.

"I think," said Anne slowly, "that I really have learned to look upon
each little hindrance as a jest and each great one as the foreshadowing
of victory. Summing up, I think that is what Redmond has given me."

"I shall have to fall back on another Professor Woodleigh quotation to
express what it has done for me," said Priscilla. "You remember that
he said in his address, 'There is so much in the world for us all if we
only have the eyes to see it, and the heart to love it, and the hand
to gather it to ourselves--so much in men and women, so much in art and
literature, so much everywhere in which to delight, and for which to be
thankful.' I think Redmond has taught me that in some measure, Anne."

"Judging from what you all, say" remarked Aunt Jamesina, "the sum
and substance is that you can learn--if you've got natural gumption
enough--in four years at college what it would take about twenty years
of living to teach you. Well, that justifies higher education in my
opinion. It's a matter I was always dubious about before."

"But what about people who haven't natural gumption, Aunt Jimsie?"

"People who haven't natural gumption never learn," retorted Aunt
Jamesina, "neither in college nor life. If they live to be a hundred
they really don't know anything more than when they were born. It's
their misfortune not their fault, poor souls. But those of us who have
some gumption should duly thank the Lord for it."

"Will you please define what gumption is, Aunt Jimsie?" asked Phil.

"No, I won't, young woman. Any one who has gumption knows what it is,
and any one who hasn't can never know what it is. So there is no need of
defining it."

The busy days flew by and examinations were over. Anne took High Honors
in English. Priscilla took Honors in Classics, and Phil in Mathematics.
Stella obtained a good all-round showing. Then came Convocation.

"This is what I would once have called an epoch in my life," said
Anne, as she took Roy's violets out of their box and gazed at them
thoughtfully. She meant to carry them, of course, but her eyes wandered
to another box on her table. It was filled with lilies-of-the-valley, as
fresh and fragrant as those which bloomed in the Green Gables yard when
June came to Avonlea. Gilbert Blythe's card lay beside it.

Anne wondered why Gilbert should have sent her flowers for Convocation.
She had seen very little of him during the past winter. He had come to
Patty's Place only one Friday evening since the Christmas holidays, and
they rarely met elsewhere. She knew he was studying very hard, aiming at
High Honors and the Cooper Prize, and he took little part in the social
doings of Redmond. Anne's own winter had been quite gay socially.
She had seen a good deal of the Gardners; she and Dorothy were very
intimate; college circles expected the announcement of her engagement to
Roy any day. Anne expected it herself. Yet just before she left Patty's
Place for Convocation she flung Roy's violets aside and put Gilbert's
lilies-of-the-valley in their place. She could not have told why she
did it. Somehow, old Avonlea days and dreams and friendships seemed very
close to her in this attainment of her long-cherished ambitions. She
and Gilbert had once picturedout merrily the day on which they should
be capped and gowned graduates in Arts. The wonderful day had come and
Roy's violets had no place in it. Only her old friend's flowers seemed
to belong to this fruition of old-blossoming hopes which he had once
shared.

For years this day had beckoned and allured to her; but when it came the
one single, keen, abiding memory it left with her was not that of the
breathless moment when the stately president of Redmond gave her cap and
diploma and hailed her B.A.; it was not of the flash in Gilbert's eyes
when he saw her lilies, nor the puzzled pained glance Roy gave her as he
passed her on the platform. It was not of Aline Gardner's condescending
congratulations, or Dorothy's ardent, impulsive good wishes. It was of
one strange, unaccountable pang that spoiled this long-expected day for
her and left in it a certain faint but enduring flavor of bitterness.

The Arts graduates gave a graduation dance that night. When Anne dressed
for it she tossed aside the pearl beads she usually wore and took from
her trunk the small box that had come to Green Gables on Christmas day.
In it was a thread-like gold chain with a tiny pink enamel heart as a
pendant. On the accompanying card was written, "With all good wishes
from your old chum, Gilbert." Anne, laughing over the memory the enamel
heart conjured up the fatal day when Gilbert had called her "Carrots"
and vainly tried to make his peace with a pink candy heart, had written
him a nice little note of thanks. But she had never worn the trinket.
Tonight she fastened it about her white throat with a dreamy smile.

She and Phil walked to Redmond together. Anne walked in silence; Phil
chattered of many things. Suddenly she said,

"I heard today that Gilbert Blythe's engagement to Christine Stuart was
to be announced as soon as Convocation was over. Did you hear anything
of it?"

"No," said Anne.

"I think it's true," said Phil lightly.

Anne did not speak. In the darkness she felt her face burning. She
slipped her hand inside her collar and caught at the gold chain. One
energetic twist and it gave way. Anne thrust the broken trinket into her
pocket. Her hands were trembling and her eyes were smarting.

But she was the gayest of all the gay revellers that night, and told
Gilbert unregretfully that her card was full when he came to ask her for
a dance. Afterwards, when she sat with the girls before the dying embers
at Patty's Place, removing the spring chilliness from their satin skins,
none chatted more blithely than she of the day's events.

"Moody Spurgeon MacPherson called here tonight after you left," said
Aunt Jamesina, who had sat up to keep the fire on. "He didn't know about
the graduation dance. That boy ought to sleep with a rubber band around
his head to train his ears not to stick out. I had a beau once who did
that and it improved him immensely. It was I who suggested it to him and
he took my advice, but he never forgave me for it."

"Moody Spurgeon is a very serious young man," yawned Priscilla. "He
is concerned with graver matters than his ears. He is going to be a
minister, you know."

"Well, I suppose the Lord doesn't regard the ears of a man," said Aunt
Jamesina gravely, dropping all further criticism of Moody Spurgeon.
Aunt Jamesina had a proper respect for the cloth even in the case of an
unfledged parson.




Chapter XXXVIII

False Dawn


"Just imagine--this night week I'll be in Avonlea--delightful thought!"
said Anne, bending over the box in which she was packing Mrs. Rachel
Lynde's quilts. "But just imagine--this night week I'll be gone forever
from Patty's Place--horrible thought!"

"I wonder if the ghost of all our laughter will echo through the maiden
dreams of Miss Patty and Miss Maria," speculated Phil.

Miss Patty and Miss Maria were coming home, after having trotted over
most of the habitable globe.

"We'll be back the second week in May" wrote Miss Patty. "I expect
Patty's Place will seem rather small after the Hall of the Kings at
Karnak, but I never did like big places to live in. And I'll be glad
enough to be home again. When you start traveling late in life you're
apt to do too much of it because you know you haven't much time left,
and it's a thing that grows on you. I'm afraid Maria will never be
contented again."

"I shall leave here my fancies and dreams to bless the next comer," said
Anne, looking around the blue room wistfully--her pretty blue room where
she had spent three such happy years. She had knelt at its window to
pray and had bent from it to watch the sunset behind the pines. She
had heard the autumn raindrops beating against it and had welcomed
the spring robins at its sill. She wondered if old dreams could haunt
rooms--if, when one left forever the room where she had joyed and
suffered and laughed and wept, something of her, intangible and
invisible, yet nonetheless real, did not remain behind like a voiceful
memory.

"I think," said Phil, "that a room where one dreams and grieves and
rejoices and lives becomes inseparably connected with those processes
and acquires a personality of its own. I am sure if I came into this
room fifty years from now it would say 'Anne, Anne' to me. What nice
times we've had here, honey! What chats and jokes and good chummy
jamborees! Oh, dear me! I'm to marry Jo in June and I know I will
be rapturously happy. But just now I feel as if I wanted this lovely
Redmond life to go on forever."

"I'm unreasonable enough just now to wish that, too," admitted Anne. "No
matter what deeper joys may come to us later on we'll never again have
just the same delightful, irresponsible existence we've had here. It's
over forever, Phil."

"What are you going to do with Rusty?" asked Phil, as that privileged
pussy padded into the room.

"I am going to take him home with me and Joseph and the Sarah-cat,"
announced Aunt Jamesina, following Rusty. "It would be a shame to
separate those cats now that they have learned to live together. It's a
hard lesson for cats and humans to learn."

"I'm sorry to part with Rusty," said Anne regretfully, "but it would be
no use to take him to Green Gables. Marilla detests cats, and Davy would
tease his life out. Besides, I don't suppose I'll be home very long.
I've been offered the principalship of the Summerside High School."

"Are you going to accept it?" asked Phil.

"I--I haven't decided yet," answered Anne, with a confused flush.

Phil nodded understandingly. Naturally Anne's plans could not be settled
until Roy had spoken. He would soon--there was no doubt of that. And
there was no doubt that Anne would say "yes" when he said "Will
you please?" Anne herself regarded the state of affairs with a
seldom-ruffled complacency. She was deeply in love with Roy. True, it
was not just what she had imagined love to be. But was anything in life,
Anne asked herself wearily, like one's imagination of it? It was the old
diamond disillusion of childhood repeated--the same disappointment she
had felt when she had first seen the chill sparkle instead of the purple
splendor she had anticipated. "That's not my idea of a diamond," she had
said. But Roy was a dear fellow and they would be very happy together,
even if some indefinable zest was missing out of life. When Roy came
down that evening and asked Anne to walk in the park every one at
Patty's Place knew what he had come to say; and every one knew, or
thought they knew, what Anne's answer would be.

"Anne is a very fortunate girl," said Aunt Jamesina.

"I suppose so," said Stella, shrugging her shoulders. "Roy is a nice
fellow and all that. But there's really nothing in him."

"That sounds very like a jealous remark, Stella Maynard," said Aunt
Jamesina rebukingly.

"It does--but I am not jealous," said Stella calmly. "I love Anne and I
like Roy. Everybody says she is making a brilliant match, and even Mrs.
Gardner thinks her charming now. It all sounds as if it were made in
heaven, but I have my doubts. Make the most of that, Aunt Jamesina."

Roy asked Anne to marry him in the little pavilion on the harbor shore
where they had talked on the rainy day of their first meeting. Anne
thought it very romantic that he should have chosen that spot. And his
proposal was as beautifully worded as if he had copied it, as one of
Ruby Gillis' lovers had done, out of a Deportment of Courtship and
Marriage. The whole effect was quite flawless. And it was also sincere.
There was no doubt that Roy meant what he said. There was no false note
to jar the symphony. Anne felt that she ought to be thrilling from head
to foot. But she wasn't; she was horribly cool. When Roy paused for his
answer she opened her lips to say her fateful yes. And then--she found
herself trembling as if she were reeling back from a precipice. To her
came one of those moments when we realize, as by a blinding flash of
illumination, more than all our previous years have taught us. She
pulled her hand from Roy's.

"Oh, I can't marry you--I can't--I can't," she cried, wildly.

Roy turned pale--and also looked rather foolish. He had--small blame to
him--felt very sure.

"What do you mean?" he stammered.

"I mean that I can't marry you," repeated Anne desperately. "I thought I
could--but I can't."

"Why can't you?" Roy asked more calmly.

"Because--I don't care enough for you."

A crimson streak came into Roy's face.

"So you've just been amusing yourself these two years?" he said slowly.

"No, no, I haven't," gasped poor Anne. Oh, how could she explain? She
COULDN'T explain. There are some things that cannot be explained. "I did
think I cared--truly I did--but I know now I don't."

"You have ruined my life," said Roy bitterly.

"Forgive me," pleaded Anne miserably, with hot cheeks and stinging eyes.

Roy turned away and stood for a few minutes looking out seaward. When he
came back to Anne, he was very pale again.

"You can give me no hope?" he said.

Anne shook her head mutely.

"Then--good-bye," said Roy. "I can't understand it--I can't believe
you are not the woman I've believed you to be. But reproaches are idle
between us. You are the only woman I can ever love. I thank you for your
friendship, at least. Good-bye, Anne."

"Good-bye," faltered Anne. When Roy had gone she sat for a long time in
the pavilion, watching a white mist creeping subtly and remorselessly
landward up the harbor. It was her hour of humiliation and self-contempt
and shame. Their waves went over her. And yet, underneath it all, was a
queer sense of recovered freedom.

She slipped into Patty's Place in the dusk and escaped to her room. But
Phil was there on the window seat.

"Wait," said Anne, flushing to anticipate the scene. "Wait til you hear
what I have to say. Phil, Roy asked me to marry him-and I refused."

"You--you REFUSED him?" said Phil blankly.

"Yes."

"Anne Shirley, are you in your senses?"

"I think so," said Anne wearily. "Oh, Phil, don't scold me. You don't
understand."

"I certainly don't understand. You've encouraged Roy Gardner in every
way for two years--and now you tell me you've refused him. Then you've
just been flirting scandalously with him. Anne, I couldn't have believed
it of YOU."

"I WASN'T flirting with him--I honestly thought I cared up to the last
minute--and then--well, I just knew I NEVER could marry him."

"I suppose," said Phil cruelly, "that you intended to marry him for his
money, and then your better self rose up and prevented you."

"I DIDN'T. I never thought about his money. Oh, I can't explain it to
you any more than I could to him."

"Well, I certainly think you have treated Roy shamefully," said Phil in
exasperation. "He's handsome and clever and rich and good. What more do
you want?"

"I want some one who BELONGS in my life. He doesn't. I was swept off
my feet at first by his good looks and knack of paying romantic
compliments; and later on I thought I MUST be in love because he was my
dark-eyed ideal."

"I am bad enough for not knowing my own mind, but you are worse," said
Phil.

"_I_ DO know my own mind," protested Anne. "The trouble is, my mind
changes and then I have to get acquainted with it all over again."

"Well, I suppose there is no use in saying anything to you."

"There is no need, Phil. I'm in the dust. This has spoiled everything
backwards. I can never think of Redmond days without recalling the
humiliation of this evening. Roy despises me--and you despise me--and I
despise myself."

"You poor darling," said Phil, melting. "Just come here and let me
comfort you. I've no right to scold you. I'd have married Alec or Alonzo
if I hadn't met Jo. Oh, Anne, things are so mixed-up in real life. They
aren't clear-cut and trimmed off, as they are in novels."

"I hope that NO one will ever again ask me to marry him as long as I
live," sobbed poor Anne, devoutly believing that she meant it.




Chapter XXXIX

Deals with Weddings


Anne felt that life partook of the nature of an anticlimax during the
first few weeks after her return to Green Gables. She missed the merry
comradeship of Patty's Place. She had dreamed some brilliant dreams
during the past winter and now they lay in the dust around her. In her
present mood of self-disgust, she could not immediately begin dreaming
again. And she discovered that, while solitude with dreams is glorious,
solitude without them has few charms.

She had not seen Roy again after their painful parting in the park
pavilion; but Dorothy came to see her before she left Kingsport.

"I'm awfully sorry you won't marry Roy," she said. "I did want you for a
sister. But you are quite right. He would bore you to death. I love him,
and he is a dear sweet boy, but really he isn't a bit interesting. He
looks as if he ought to be, but he isn't."

"This won't spoil OUR friendship, will it, Dorothy?" Anne had asked
wistfully.

"No, indeed. You're too good to lose. If I can't have you for a sister
I mean to keep you as a chum anyway. And don't fret over Roy. He is
feeling terribly just now--I have to listen to his outpourings every
day--but he'll get over it. He always does."

"Oh--ALWAYS?" said Anne with a slight change of voice. "So he has 'got
over it' before?"

"Dear me, yes," said Dorothy frankly. "Twice before. And he raved to me
just the same both times. Not that the others actually refused him--they
simply announced their engagements to some one else. Of course, when he
met you he vowed to me that he had never really loved before--that the
previous affairs had been merely boyish fancies. But I don't think you
need worry."

Anne decided not to worry. Her feelings were a mixture of relief and
resentment. Roy had certainly told her she was the only one he had ever
loved. No doubt he believed it. But it was a comfort to feel that she
had not, in all likelihood, ruined his life. There were other goddesses,
and Roy, according to Dorothy, must needs be worshipping at some shrine.
Nevertheless, life was stripped of several more illusions, and Anne
began to think drearily that it seemed rather bare.

She came down from the porch gable on the evening of her return with a
sorrowful face.

"What has happened to the old Snow Queen, Marilla?"

"Oh, I knew you'd feel bad over that," said Marilla. "I felt bad myself.
That tree was there ever since I was a young girl. It blew down in the
big gale we had in March. It was rotten at the core."

"I'll miss it so," grieved Anne. "The porch gable doesn't seem the same
room without it. I'll never look from its window again without a sense
of loss. And oh, I never came home to Green Gables before that Diana
wasn't here to welcome me."

"Diana has something else to think of just now," said Mrs. Lynde
significantly.

"Well, tell me all the Avonlea news," said Anne, sitting down on the
porch steps, where the evening sunshine fell over her hair in a fine
golden rain.

"There isn't much news except what we've wrote you," said Mrs. Lynde. "I
suppose you haven't heard that Simon Fletcher broke his leg last week.
It's a great thing for his family. They're getting a hundred things done
that they've always wanted to do but couldn't as long as he was about,
the old crank."

"He came of an aggravating family," remarked Marilla.

"Aggravating? Well, rather! His mother used to get up in prayer-meeting
and tell all her children's shortcomings and ask prayers for them.
'Course it made them mad, and worse than ever."

"You haven't told Anne the news about Jane," suggested Marilla.

"Oh, Jane," sniffed Mrs. Lynde. "Well," she conceded grudgingly, "Jane
Andrews is home from the West--came last week--and she's going to be
married to a Winnipeg millionaire. You may be sure Mrs. Harmon lost no
time in telling it far and wide."

"Dear old Jane--I'm so glad," said Anne heartily. "She deserves the good
things of life."

"Oh, I ain't saying anything against Jane. She's a nice enough girl. But
she isn't in the millionaire class, and you'll find there's not much to
recommend that man but his money, that's what. Mrs. Harmon says he's an
Englishman who has made money in mines but _I_ believe he'll turn out to
be a Yankee. He certainly must have money, for he has just showered Jane
with jewelry. Her engagement ring is a diamond cluster so big that it
looks like a plaster on Jane's fat paw."

Mrs. Lynde could not keep some bitterness out of her tone. Here was
Jane Andrews, that plain little plodder, engaged to a millionaire, while
Anne, it seemed, was not yet bespoken by any one, rich or poor. And Mrs.
Harmon Andrews did brag insufferably.

"What has Gilbert Blythe been doing to at college?" asked Marilla. "I
saw him when he came home last week, and he is so pale and thin I hardly
knew him."

"He studied very hard last winter," said Anne. "You know he took High
Honors in Classics and the Cooper Prize. It hasn't been taken for five
years! So I think he's rather run down. We're all a little tired."

"Anyhow, you're a B.A. and Jane Andrews isn't and never will be," said
Mrs. Lynde, with gloomy satisfaction.

A few evenings later Anne went down to see Jane, but the latter was
away in Charlottetown--"getting sewing done," Mrs. Harmon informed Anne
proudly. "Of course an Avonlea dressmaker wouldn't do for Jane under the
circumstances."

"I've heard something very nice about Jane," said Anne.

"Yes, Jane has done pretty well, even if she isn't a B.A.," said Mrs.
Harmon, with a slight toss of her head. "Mr. Inglis is worth millions,
and they're going to Europe on their wedding tour. When they come back
they'll live in a perfect mansion of marble in Winnipeg. Jane has only
one trouble--she can cook so well and her husband won't let her cook. He
is so rich he hires his cooking done. They're going to keep a cook and
two other maids and a coachman and a man-of-all-work. But what about
YOU, Anne? I don't hear anything of your being married, after all your
college-going."

"Oh," laughed Anne, "I am going to be an old maid. I really can't find
any one to suit me." It was rather wicked of her. She deliberately meant
to remind Mrs. Andrews that if she became an old maid it was not because
she had not had at least one chance of marriage. But Mrs. Harmon took
swift revenge.

"Well, the over-particular girls generally get left, I notice. And
what's this I hear about Gilbert Blythe being engaged to a Miss Stuart?
Charlie Sloane tells me she is perfectly beautiful. Is it true?"

"I don't know if it is true that he is engaged to Miss Stuart," replied
Anne, with Spartan composure, "but it is certainly true that she is very
lovely."

"I once thought you and Gilbert would have made a match of it," said
Mrs. Harmon. "If you don't take care, Anne, all of your beaux will slip
through your fingers."

Anne decided not to continue her duel with Mrs. Harmon. You could not
fence with an antagonist who met rapier thrust with blow of battle axe.

"Since Jane is away," she said, rising haughtily, "I don't think I can
stay longer this morning. I'll come down when she comes home."

"Do," said Mrs. Harmon effusively. "Jane isn't a bit proud. She just
means to associate with her old friends the same as ever. She'll be real
glad to see you."

Jane's millionaire arrived the last of May and carried her off in a
blaze of splendor. Mrs. Lynde was spitefully gratified to find that
Mr. Inglis was every day of forty, and short and thin and grayish. Mrs.
Lynde did not spare him in her enumeration of his shortcomings, you may
be sure.

"It will take all his gold to gild a pill like him, that's what," said
Mrs. Rachel solemnly.

"He looks kind and good-hearted," said Anne loyally, "and I'm sure he
thinks the world of Jane."

"Humph!" said Mrs. Rachel.

Phil Gordon was married the next week and Anne went over to Bolingbroke
to be her bridesmaid. Phil made a dainty fairy of a bride, and the Rev.
Jo was so radiant in his happiness that nobody thought him plain.

"We're going for a lovers' saunter through the land of Evangeline," said
Phil, "and then we'll settle down on Patterson Street. Mother thinks
it is terrible--she thinks Jo might at least take a church in a decent
place. But the wilderness of the Patterson slums will blossom like the
rose for me if Jo is there. Oh, Anne, I'm so happy my heart aches with
it."

Anne was always glad in the happiness of her friends; but it is
sometimes a little lonely to be surrounded everywhere by a happiness
that is not your own. And it was just the same when she went back to
Avonlea. This time it was Diana who was bathed in the wonderful glory
that comes to a woman when her first-born is laid beside her. Anne
looked at the white young mother with a certain awe that had never
entered into her feelings for Diana before. Could this pale woman with
the rapture in her eyes be the little black-curled, rosy-cheeked Diana
she had played with in vanished schooldays? It gave her a queer desolate
feeling that she herself somehow belonged only in those past years and
had no business in the present at all.

"Isn't he perfectly beautiful?" said Diana proudly.

The little fat fellow was absurdly like Fred--just as round, just as
red. Anne really could not say conscientiously that she thought him
beautiful, but she vowed sincerely that he was sweet and kissable and
altogether delightful.

"Before he came I wanted a girl, so that I could call her ANNE," said
Diana. "But now that little Fred is here I wouldn't exchange him for a
million girls. He just COULDN'T have been anything but his own precious
self."

"'Every little baby is the sweetest and the best,'" quoted Mrs. Allan
gaily. "If little Anne HAD come you'd have felt just the same about
her."

Mrs. Allan was visiting in Avonlea, for the first time since leaving it.
She was as gay and sweet and sympathetic as ever. Her old girl friends
had welcomed her back rapturously. The reigning minister's wife was an
estimable lady, but she was not exactly a kindred spirit.

"I can hardly wait till he gets old enough to talk," sighed Diana. "I
just long to hear him say 'mother.' And oh, I'm determined that his
first memory of me shall be a nice one. The first memory I have of
my mother is of her slapping me for something I had done. I am sure I
deserved it, and mother was always a good mother and I love her dearly.
But I do wish my first memory of her was nicer."

"I have just one memory of my mother and it is the sweetest of all
my memories," said Mrs. Allan. "I was five years old, and I had been
allowed to go to school one day with my two older sisters. When school
came out my sisters went home in different groups, each supposing I was
with the other. Instead I had run off with a little girl I had played
with at recess. We went to her home, which was near the school, and
began making mud pies. We were having a glorious time when my older
sister arrived, breathless and angry.

"'You naughty girl" she cried, snatching my reluctant hand and dragging
me along with her. 'Come home this minute. Oh, you're going to catch it!
Mother is awful cross. She is going to give you a good whipping.'

"I had never been whipped. Dread and terror filled my poor little heart.
I have never been so miserable in my life as I was on that walk home. I
had not meant to be naughty. Phemy Cameron had asked me to go home with
her and I had not known it was wrong to go. And now I was to be whipped
for it. When we got home my sister dragged me into the kitchen where
mother was sitting by the fire in the twilight. My poor wee legs were
trembling so that I could hardly stand. And mother--mother just took me
up in her arms, without one word of rebuke or harshness, kissed me
and held me close to her heart. 'I was so frightened you were lost,
darling,' she said tenderly. I could see the love shining in her eyes as
she looked down on me. She never scolded or reproached me for what I had
done--only told me I must never go away again without asking permission.
She died very soon afterwards. That is the only memory I have of her.
Isn't it a beautiful one?"

Anne felt lonelier than ever as she walked home, going by way of the
Birch Path and Willowmere. She had not walked that way for many moons.
It was a darkly-purple bloomy night. The air was heavy with blossom
fragrance--almost too heavy. The cloyed senses recoiled from it as
from an overfull cup. The birches of the path had grown from the fairy
saplings of old to big trees. Everything had changed. Anne felt that she
would be glad when the summer was over and she was away at work again.
Perhaps life would not seem so empty then.

     "'I've tried the world--it wears no more
     The coloring of romance it wore,'"

sighed Anne--and was straightway much comforted by the romance in the
idea of the world being denuded of romance!




Chapter XL

A Book of Revelation


The Irvings came back to Echo Lodge for the summer, and Anne spent
a happy three weeks there in July. Miss Lavendar had not changed;
Charlotta the Fourth was a very grown-up young lady now, but still
adored Anne sincerely.

"When all's said and done, Miss Shirley, ma'am, I haven't seen any one
in Boston that's equal to you," she said frankly.

Paul was almost grown up, too. He was sixteen, his chestnut curls had
given place to close-cropped brown locks, and he was more interested
in football than fairies. But the bond between him and his old teacher
still held. Kindred spirits alone do not change with changing years.

It was a wet, bleak, cruel evening in July when Anne came back to Green
Gables. One of the fierce summer storms which sometimes sweep over the
gulf was ravaging the sea. As Anne came in the first raindrops dashed
against the panes.

"Was that Paul who brought you home?" asked Marilla. "Why didn't you
make him stay all night. It's going to be a wild evening."

"He'll reach Echo Lodge before the rain gets very heavy, I think.
Anyway, he wanted to go back tonight. Well, I've had a splendid visit,
but I'm glad to see you dear folks again. 'East, west, hame's best.'
Davy, have you been growing again lately?"

"I've growed a whole inch since you left," said Davy proudly. "I'm as
tall as Milty Boulter now. Ain't I glad. He'll have to stop crowing
about being bigger. Say, Anne, did you know that Gilbert Blythe is
dying?" Anne stood quite silent and motionless, looking at Davy. Her
face had gone so white that Marilla thought she was going to faint.

"Davy, hold your tongue," said Mrs. Rachel angrily. "Anne, don't
look like that--DON'T LOOK LIKE THAT! We didn't mean to tell you so
suddenly."

"Is--it--true?" asked Anne in a voice that was not hers.

"Gilbert is very ill," said Mrs. Lynde gravely. "He took down with
typhoid fever just after you left for Echo Lodge. Did you never hear of
it?"

"No," said that unknown voice.

"It was a very bad case from the start. The doctor said he'd been
terribly run down. They've a trained nurse and everything's been done.
DON'T look like that, Anne. While there's life there's hope."

"Mr. Harrison was here this evening and he said they had no hope of
him," reiterated Davy.

Marilla, looking old and worn and tired, got up and marched Davy grimly
out of the kitchen.

"Oh, DON'T look so, dear," said Mrs. Rachel, putting her kind old arms
about the pallid girl. "I haven't given up hope, indeed I haven't. He's
got the Blythe constitution in his favor, that's what."

Anne gently put Mrs. Lynde's arms away from her, walked blindly across
the kitchen, through the hall, up the stairs to her old room. At its
window she knelt down, staring out unseeingly. It was very dark. The
rain was beating down over the shivering fields. The Haunted Woods was
full of the groans of mighty trees wrung in the tempest, and the air
throbbed with the thunderous crash of billows on the distant shore. And
Gilbert was dying!

There is a book of Revelation in every one's life, as there is in the
Bible. Anne read hers that bitter night, as she kept her agonized vigil
through the hours of storm and darkness. She loved Gilbert--had always
loved him! She knew that now. She knew that she could no more cast him
out of her life without agony than she could have cut off her right hand
and cast it from her. And the knowledge had come too late--too late even
for the bitter solace of being with him at the last. If she had not been
so blind--so foolish--she would have had the right to go to him now. But
he would never know that she loved him--he would go away from this
life thinking that she did not care. Oh, the black years of emptiness
stretching before her! She could not live through them--she could not!
She cowered down by her window and wished, for the first time in her
gay young life, that she could die, too. If Gilbert went away from her,
without one word or sign or message, she could not live. Nothing was of
any value without him. She belonged to him and he to her. In her hour
of supreme agony she had no doubt of that. He did not love Christine
Stuart--never had loved Christine Stuart. Oh, what a fool she had been
not to realize what the bond was that had held her to Gilbert--to think
that the flattered fancy she had felt for Roy Gardner had been love. And
now she must pay for her folly as for a crime.

Mrs. Lynde and Marilla crept to her door before they went to bed, shook
their heads doubtfully at each other over the silence, and went away.
The storm raged all night, but when the dawn came it was spent. Anne
saw a fairy fringe of light on the skirts of darkness. Soon the eastern
hilltops had a fire-shot ruby rim. The clouds rolled themselves away
into great, soft, white masses on the horizon; the sky gleamed blue and
silvery. A hush fell over the world.

Anne rose from her knees and crept downstairs. The freshness of the
rain-wind blew against her white face as she went out into the yard, and
cooled her dry, burning eyes. A merry rollicking whistle was lilting up
the lane. A moment later Pacifique Buote came in sight.

Anne's physical strength suddenly failed her. If she had not clutched
at a low willow bough she would have fallen. Pacifique was George
Fletcher's hired man, and George Fletcher lived next door to the
Blythes. Mrs. Fletcher was Gilbert's aunt. Pacifique would know
if--if--Pacifique would know what there was to be known.

Pacifique strode sturdily on along the red lane, whistling. He did not
see Anne. She made three futile attempts to call him. He was almost past
before she succeeded in making her quivering lips call, "Pacifique!"

Pacifique turned with a grin and a cheerful good morning.

"Pacifique," said Anne faintly, "did you come from George Fletcher's
this morning?"

"Sure," said Pacifique amiably. "I got de word las' night dat my fader,
he was seeck. It was so stormy dat I couldn't go den, so I start vair
early dis mornin'. I'm goin' troo de woods for short cut."

"Did you hear how Gilbert Blythe was this morning?" Anne's desperation
drove her to the question. Even the worst would be more endurable than
this hideous suspense.

"He's better," said Pacifique. "He got de turn las' night. De doctor say
he'll be all right now dis soon while. Had close shave, dough! Dat boy,
he jus' keel himself at college. Well, I mus' hurry. De old man, he'll
be in hurry to see me."

Pacifique resumed his walk and his whistle. Anne gazed after him with
eyes where joy was driving out the strained anguish of the night. He was
a very lank, very ragged, very homely youth. But in her sight he was as
beautiful as those who bring good tidings on the mountains. Never, as
long as she lived, would Anne see Pacifique's brown, round, black-eyed
face without a warm remembrance of the moment when he had given to her
the oil of joy for mourning.

Long after Pacifique's gay whistle had faded into the phantom of music
and then into silence far up under the maples of Lover's Lane Anne stood
under the willows, tasting the poignant sweetness of life when some
great dread has been removed from it. The morning was a cup filled
with mist and glamor. In the corner near her was a rich surprise of
new-blown, crystal-dewed roses. The trills and trickles of song from the
birds in the big tree above her seemed in perfect accord with her mood.
A sentence from a very old, very true, very wonderful Book came to her
lips,

"Weeping may endure for a night but joy cometh in the morning."




XLI

Love Takes Up the Glass of Time


"I've come up to ask you to go for one of our old-time rambles through
September woods and 'over hills where spices grow,' this afternoon,"
said Gilbert, coming suddenly around the porch corner. "Suppose we visit
Hester Gray's garden."

Anne, sitting on the stone step with her lap full of a pale, filmy,
green stuff, looked up rather blankly.

"Oh, I wish I could," she said slowly, "but I really can't, Gilbert. I'm
going to Alice Penhallow's wedding this evening, you know. I've got to
do something to this dress, and by the time it's finished I'll have to
get ready. I'm so sorry. I'd love to go."

"Well, can you go tomorrow afternoon, then?" asked Gilbert, apparently
not much disappointed.

"Yes, I think so."

"In that case I shall hie me home at once to do something I should
otherwise have to do tomorrow. So Alice Penhallow is to be married
tonight. Three weddings for you in one summer, Anne--Phil's, Alice's,
and Jane's. I'll never forgive Jane for not inviting me to her wedding."

"You really can't blame her when you think of the tremendous Andrews
connection who had to be invited. The house could hardly hold them all.
I was only bidden by grace of being Jane's old chum--at least on Jane's
part. I think Mrs. Harmon's motive for inviting me was to let me see
Jane's surpassing gorgeousness."

"Is it true that she wore so many diamonds that you couldn't tell where
the diamonds left off and Jane began?"

Anne laughed.

"She certainly wore a good many. What with all the diamonds and white
satin and tulle and lace and roses and orange blossoms, prim little
Jane was almost lost to sight. But she was VERY happy, and so was Mr.
Inglis--and so was Mrs. Harmon."

"Is that the dress you're going to wear tonight?" asked Gilbert, looking
down at the fluffs and frills.

"Yes. Isn't it pretty? And I shall wear starflowers in my hair. The
Haunted Wood is full of them this summer."

Gilbert had a sudden vision of Anne, arrayed in a frilly green gown,
with the virginal curves of arms and throat slipping out of it, and
white stars shining against the coils of her ruddy hair. The vision made
him catch his breath. But he turned lightly away.

"Well, I'll be up tomorrow. Hope you'll have a nice time tonight."

Anne looked after him as he strode away, and sighed. Gilbert was
friendly--very friendly--far too friendly. He had come quite often to
Green Gables after his recovery, and something of their old comradeship
had returned. But Anne no longer found it satisfying. The rose of love
made the blossom of friendship pale and scentless by contrast. And
Anne had again begun to doubt if Gilbert now felt anything for her but
friendship. In the common light of common day her radiant certainty of
that rapt morning had faded. She was haunted by a miserable fear that
her mistake could never be rectified. It was quite likely that it was
Christine whom Gilbert loved after all. Perhaps he was even engaged
to her. Anne tried to put all unsettling hopes out of her heart, and
reconcile herself to a future where work and ambition must take the
place of love. She could do good, if not noble, work as a teacher; and
the success her little sketches were beginning to meet with in certain
editorial sanctums augured well for her budding literary dreams.
But--but--Anne picked up her green dress and sighed again.

When Gilbert came the next afternoon he found Anne waiting for him,
fresh as the dawn and fair as a star, after all the gaiety of the
preceding night. She wore a green dress--not the one she had worn to
the wedding, but an old one which Gilbert had told her at a Redmond
reception he liked especially. It was just the shade of green that
brought out the rich tints of her hair, and the starry gray of her
eyes and the iris-like delicacy of her skin. Gilbert, glancing at her
sideways as they walked along a shadowy woodpath, thought she had never
looked so lovely. Anne, glancing sideways at Gilbert, now and then,
thought how much older he looked since his illness. It was as if he had
put boyhood behind him forever.

The day was beautiful and the way was beautiful. Anne was almost sorry
when they reached Hester Gray's garden, and sat down on the old bench.
But it was beautiful there, too--as beautiful as it had been on the
faraway day of the Golden Picnic, when Diana and Jane and Priscilla and
she had found it. Then it had been lovely with narcissus and violets;
now golden rod had kindled its fairy torches in the corners and asters
dotted it bluely. The call of the brook came up through the woods from
the valley of birches with all its old allurement; the mellow air
was full of the purr of the sea; beyond were fields rimmed by fences
bleached silvery gray in the suns of many summers, and long hills
scarfed with the shadows of autumnal clouds; with the blowing of the
west wind old dreams returned.

"I think," said Anne softly, "that 'the land where dreams come true' is
in the blue haze yonder, over that little valley."

"Have you any unfulfilled dreams, Anne?" asked Gilbert.

Something in his tone--something she had not heard since that miserable
evening in the orchard at Patty's Place--made Anne's heart beat wildly.
But she made answer lightly.

"Of course. Everybody has. It wouldn't do for us to have all our dreams
fulfilled. We would be as good as dead if we had nothing left to dream
about. What a delicious aroma that low-descending sun is extracting
from the asters and ferns. I wish we could see perfumes as well as smell
them. I'm sure they would be very beautiful."

Gilbert was not to be thus sidetracked.

"I have a dream," he said slowly. "I persist in dreaming it, although it
has often seemed to me that it could never come true. I dream of a home
with a hearth-fire in it, a cat and dog, the footsteps of friends--and
YOU!"

Anne wanted to speak but she could find no words. Happiness was breaking
over her like a wave. It almost frightened her.

"I asked you a question over two years ago, Anne. If I ask it again
today will you give me a different answer?"

Still Anne could not speak. But she lifted her eyes, shining with all
the love-rapture of countless generations, and looked into his for a
moment. He wanted no other answer.

They lingered in the old garden until twilight, sweet as dusk in Eden
must have been, crept over it. There was so much to talk over and
recall--things said and done and heard and thought and felt and
misunderstood.

"I thought you loved Christine Stuart," Anne told him, as reproachfully
as if she had not given him every reason to suppose that she loved Roy
Gardner.

Gilbert laughed boyishly.

"Christine was engaged to somebody in her home town. I knew it and she
knew I knew it. When her brother graduated he told me his sister was
coming to Kingsport the next winter to take music, and asked me if I
would look after her a bit, as she knew no one and would be very lonely.
So I did. And then I liked Christine for her own sake. She is one of
the nicest girls I've ever known. I knew college gossip credited us with
being in love with each other. I didn't care. Nothing mattered much to
me for a time there, after you told me you could never love me, Anne.
There was nobody else--there never could be anybody else for me but you.
I've loved you ever since that day you broke your slate over my head in
school."

"I don't see how you could keep on loving me when I was such a little
fool," said Anne.

"Well, I tried to stop," said Gilbert frankly, "not because I thought
you what you call yourself, but because I felt sure there was no chance
for me after Gardner came on the scene. But I couldn't--and I can't tell
you, either, what it's meant to me these two years to believe you were
going to marry him, and be told every week by some busybody that your
engagement was on the point of being announced. I believed it until one
blessed day when I was sitting up after the fever. I got a letter from
Phil Gordon--Phil Blake, rather--in which she told me there was really
nothing between you and Roy, and advised me to 'try again.' Well, the
doctor was amazed at my rapid recovery after that."

Anne laughed--then shivered.

"I can never forget the night I thought you were dying, Gilbert. Oh, I
knew--I KNEW then--and I thought it was too late."

"But it wasn't, sweetheart. Oh, Anne, this makes up for everything,
doesn't it? Let's resolve to keep this day sacred to perfect beauty all
our lives for the gift it has given us."

"It's the birthday of our happiness," said Anne softly. "I've always
loved this old garden of Hester Gray's, and now it will be dearer than
ever."

"But I'll have to ask you to wait a long time, Anne," said Gilbert
sadly. "It will be three years before I'll finish my medical course. And
even then there will be no diamond sunbursts and marble halls."

Anne laughed.

"I don't want sunbursts and marble halls. I just want YOU. You see I'm
quite as shameless as Phil about it. Sunbursts and marble halls may be
all very well, but there is more 'scope for imagination' without them.
And as for the waiting, that doesn't matter. We'll just be happy,
waiting and working for each other--and dreaming. Oh, dreams will be
very sweet now."

Gilbert drew her close to him and kissed her. Then they walked home
together in the dusk, crowned king and queen in the bridal realm of
love, along winding paths fringed with the sweetest flowers that ever
bloomed, and over haunted meadows where winds of hope and memory blew.






THE GOLDEN ROAD

By L. M. Montgomery


     "Life was a rose-lipped comrade
      With purple flowers dripping from her fingers."
                                        --The Author.


               TO
               THE MEMORY OF
               Aunt Mary Lawson
               WHO TOLD ME MANY OF THE TALES
               REPEATED BY THE
               STORY GIRL




FOREWORD


Once upon a time we all walked on the golden road. It was a fair
highway, through the Land of Lost Delight; shadow and sunshine were
blessedly mingled, and every turn and dip revealed a fresh charm and a
new loveliness to eager hearts and unspoiled eyes.

On that road we heard the song of morning stars; we drank in fragrances
aerial and sweet as a May mist; we were rich in gossamer fancies and
iris hopes; our hearts sought and found the boon of dreams; the years
waited beyond and they were very fair; life was a rose-lipped comrade
with purple flowers dripping from her fingers.

We may long have left the golden road behind, but its memories are the
dearest of our eternal possessions; and those who cherish them as such
may haply find a pleasure in the pages of this book, whose people are
pilgrims on the golden road of youth.





THE GOLDEN ROAD




CHAPTER I. A NEW DEPARTURE


"I've thought of something amusing for the winter," I said as we
drew into a half-circle around the glorious wood-fire in Uncle Alec's
kitchen.

It had been a day of wild November wind, closing down into a wet, eerie
twilight. Outside, the wind was shrilling at the windows and around the
eaves, and the rain was playing on the roof. The old willow at the gate
was writhing in the storm and the orchard was a place of weird music,
born of all the tears and fears that haunt the halls of night. But
little we cared for the gloom and the loneliness of the outside world;
we kept them at bay with the light of the fire and the laughter of our
young lips.

We had been having a splendid game of Blind-Man's Buff. That is, it
had been splendid at first; but later the fun went out of it because we
found that Peter was, of malice prepense, allowing himself to be
caught too easily, in order that he might have the pleasure of catching
Felicity--which he never failed to do, no matter how tightly his eyes
were bound. What remarkable goose said that love is blind? Love can see
through five folds of closely-woven muffler with ease!

"I'm getting tired," said Cecily, whose breath was coming rather quickly
and whose pale cheeks had bloomed into scarlet. "Let's sit down and get
the Story Girl to tell us a story."

But as we dropped into our places the Story Girl shot a significant
glance at me which intimated that this was the psychological moment for
introducing the scheme she and I had been secretly developing for some
days. It was really the Story Girl's idea and none of mine. But she had
insisted that I should make the suggestion as coming wholly from myself.

"If you don't, Felicity won't agree to it. You know yourself, Bev, how
contrary she's been lately over anything I mention. And if she goes
against it Peter will too--the ninny!--and it wouldn't be any fun if we
weren't all in it."

"What is it?" asked Felicity, drawing her chair slightly away from
Peter's.

"It is this. Let us get up a newspaper of our own--write it all
ourselves, and have all we do in it. Don't you think we can get a lot of
fun out of it?"

Everyone looked rather blank and amazed, except the Story Girl. She knew
what she had to do, and she did it.

"What a silly idea!" she exclaimed, with a contemptuous toss of her long
brown curls. "Just as if WE could get up a newspaper!"

Felicity fired up, exactly as we had hoped.

"I think it's a splendid idea," she said enthusiastically. "I'd like to
know why we couldn't get up as good a newspaper as they have in town!
Uncle Roger says the Daily Enterprise has gone to the dogs--all the news
it prints is that some old woman has put a shawl on her head and gone
across the road to have tea with another old woman. I guess we could do
better than that. You needn't think, Sara Stanley, that nobody but you
can do anything."

"I think it would be great fun," said Peter decidedly. "My Aunt Jane
helped edit a paper when she was at Queen's Academy, and she said it was
very amusing and helped her a great deal."

The Story Girl could hide her delight only by dropping her eyes and
frowning.

"Bev wants to be editor," she said, "and I don't see how he can, with no
experience. Anyhow, it would be a lot of trouble."

"Some people are so afraid of a little bother," retorted Felicity.

"I think it would be nice," said Cecily timidly, "and none of us have
any experience of being editors, any more than Bev, so that wouldn't
matter."

"Will it be printed?" asked Dan.

"Oh, no," I said. "We can't have it printed. We'll just have to write it
out--we can buy foolscap from the teacher."

"I don't think it will be much of a newspaper if it isn't printed," said
Dan scornfully.

"It doesn't matter very much what YOU think," said Felicity.

"Thank you," retorted Dan.

"Of course," said the Story Girl hastily, not wishing to have Dan turned
against our project, "if all the rest of you want it I'll go in for it
too. I daresay it would be real good fun, now that I come to think of
it. And we'll keep the copies, and when we become famous they'll be
quite valuable."

"I wonder if any of us ever will be famous," said Felix.

"The Story Girl will be," I said.

"I don't see how she can be," said Felicity skeptically. "Why, she's
just one of us."

"Well, it's decided, then, that we're to have a newspaper," I resumed
briskly. "The next thing is to choose a name for it. That's a very
important thing."

"How often are you going to publish it?" asked Felix.

"Once a month."

"I thought newspapers came out every day, or every week at least," said
Dan.

"We couldn't have one every week," I explained. "It would be too much
work."

"Well, that's an argument," admitted Dan. "The less work you can get
along with the better, in my opinion. No, Felicity, you needn't say it.
I know exactly what you want to say, so save your breath to cool your
porridge. I agree with you that I never work if I can find anything else
to do."


    "'Remember it is harder still
      To have no work to do,"'


quoted Cecily reprovingly.

"I don't believe THAT," rejoined Dan. "I'm like the Irishman who said he
wished the man who begun work had stayed and finished it."

"Well, is it decided that Bev is to be editor?" asked Felix.

"Of course it is," Felicity answered for everybody.

"Then," said Felix, "I move that the name be The King Monthly Magazine."

"That sounds fine," said Peter, hitching his chair a little nearer
Felicity's.

"But," said Cecily timidly, "that will leave out Peter and the Story
Girl and Sara Ray, just as if they didn't have a share in it. I don't
think that would be fair."

"You name it then, Cecily," I suggested.

"Oh!" Cecily threw a deprecating glance at the Story Girl and Felicity.
Then, meeting the contempt in the latter's gaze, she raised her head
with unusual spirit.

"I think it would be nice just to call it Our Magazine," she said. "Then
we'd all feel as if we had a share in it."

"Our Magazine it will be, then," I said. "And as for having a share in
it, you bet we'll all have a share in it. If I'm to be editor you'll all
have to be sub-editors, and have charge of a department."

"Oh, I couldn't," protested Cecily.

"You must," I said inexorably. "'England expects everyone to do his
duty.' That's our motto--only we'll put Prince Edward Island in place of
England. There must be no shirking. Now, what departments will we have?
We must make it as much like a real newspaper as we can."

"Well, we ought to have an etiquette department, then," said Felicity.
"The Family Guide has one."

"Of course we'll have one," I said, "and Dan will edit it."

"Dan!" exclaimed Felicity, who had fondly expected to be asked to edit
it herself.

"I can run an etiquette column as well as that idiot in the Family
Guide, anyhow," said Dan defiantly. "But you can't have an etiquette
department unless questions are asked. What am I to do if nobody asks
any?"

"You must make some up," said the Story Girl. "Uncle Roger says that is
what the Family Guide man does. He says it is impossible that there can
be as many hopeless fools in the world as that column would stand for
otherwise."

"We want you to edit the household department, Felicity," I said, seeing
a cloud lowering on that fair lady's brow. "Nobody can do that as well
as you. Felix will edit the jokes and the Information Bureau, and Cecily
must be fashion editor. Yes, you must, Sis. It's easy as wink. And the
Story Girl will attend to the personals. They're very important. Anyone
can contribute a personal, but the Story Girl is to see there are some
in every issue, even if she has to make them up, like Dan with the
etiquette."

"Bev will run the scrap book department, besides the editorials," said
the Story Girl, seeing that I was too modest to say it myself.

"Aren't you going to have a story page?" asked Peter.

"We will, if you'll be fiction and poetry editor," I said.

Peter, in his secret soul, was dismayed, but he would not blanch before
Felicity.

"All right," he said, recklessly.

"We can put anything we like in the scrap book department," I explained,
"but all the other contributions must be original, and all must have the
name of the writer signed to them, except the personals. We must all do
our best. Our Magazine is to be 'a feast of reason and flow of soul."'

I felt that I had worked in two quotations with striking effect. The
others, with the exception of the Story Girl, looked suitably impressed.

"But," said Cecily, reproachfully, "haven't you anything for Sara Ray to
do? She'll feel awful bad if she is left out."

I had forgotten Sara Ray. Nobody, except Cecily, ever did remember
Sara Ray unless she was on the spot. But we decided to put her in as
advertising manager. That sounded well and really meant very little.

"Well, we'll go ahead then," I said, with a sigh of relief that the
project had been so easily launched. "We'll get the first issue out
about the first of January. And whatever else we do we mustn't let Uncle
Roger get hold of it. He'd make such fearful fun of it."

"I hope we can make a success of it," said Peter moodily. He had been
moody ever since he was entrapped into being fiction editor.

"It will be a success if we are determined to succeed," I said. "'Where
there is a will there is always a way.'"

"That's just what Ursula Townley said when her father locked her in her
room the night she was going to run away with Kenneth MacNair," said the
Story Girl.

We pricked up our ears, scenting a story.

"Who were Ursula Townley and Kenneth MacNair?" I asked.

"Kenneth MacNair was a first cousin of the Awkward Man's grandfather,
and Ursula Townley was the belle of the Island in her day. Who do you
suppose told me the story--no, read it to me, out of his brown book?"

"Never the Awkward Man himself!" I exclaimed incredulously.

"Yes, he did," said the Story Girl triumphantly. "I met him one day
last week back in the maple woods when I was looking for ferns. He was
sitting by the spring, writing in his brown book. He hid it when he saw
me and looked real silly; but after I had talked to him awhile I just
asked him about it, and told him that the gossips said he wrote poetry
in it, and if he did would he tell me, because I was dying to know. He
said he wrote a little of everything in it; and then I begged him to
read me something out of it, and he read me the story of Ursula and
Kenneth."

"I don't see how you ever had the face," said Felicity; and even Cecily
looked as if she thought the Story Girl had gone rather far.

"Never mind that," cried Felix, "but tell us the story. That's the main
thing."

"I'll tell it just as the Awkward Man read it, as far as I can," said
the Story Girl, "but I can't put all his nice poetical touches in,
because I can't remember them all, though he read it over twice for me."




CHAPTER II. A WILL, A WAY AND A WOMAN


"One day, over a hundred years ago, Ursula Townley was waiting for
Kenneth MacNair in a great beechwood, where brown nuts were falling
and an October wind was making the leaves dance on the ground like
pixy-people."

"What are pixy-people?" demanded Peter, forgetting the Story Girl's
dislike of interruptions.

"Hush," whispered Cecily. "That is only one of the Awkward Man's
poetical touches, I guess."

"There were cultivated fields between the grove and the dark blue gulf;
but far behind and on each side were woods, for Prince Edward Island a
hundred years ago was not what it is today. The settlements were few and
scattered, and the population so scanty that old Hugh Townley boasted
that he knew every man, woman and child in it.

"Old Hugh was quite a noted man in his day. He was noted for
several things--he was rich, he was hospitable, he was proud, he was
masterful--and he had for daughter the handsomest young woman in Prince
Edward Island.

"Of course, the young men were not blind to her good looks, and she had
so many lovers that all the other girls hated her--"

"You bet!" said Dan, aside--

"But the only one who found favour in her eyes was the very last man she
should have pitched her fancy on, at least if old Hugh were the
judge. Kenneth MacNair was a dark-eyed young sea-captain of the next
settlement, and it was to meet him that Ursula stole to the beechwood on
that autumn day of crisp wind and ripe sunshine. Old Hugh had forbidden
his house to the young man, making such a scene of fury about it that
even Ursula's high spirit quailed. Old Hugh had really nothing against
Kenneth himself; but years before either Kenneth or Ursula was born,
Kenneth's father had beaten Hugh Townley in a hotly contested election.
Political feeling ran high in those days, and old Hugh had never
forgiven the MacNair his victory. The feud between the families dated
from that tempest in the provincial teapot, and the surplus of votes
on the wrong side was the reason why, thirty years after, Ursula had to
meet her lover by stealth if she met him at all."

"Was the MacNair a Conservative or a Grit?" asked Felicity.

"It doesn't make any difference what he was," said the Story Girl
impatiently. "Even a Tory would be romantic a hundred years ago. Well,
Ursula couldn't see Kenneth very often, for Kenneth lived fifteen miles
away and was often absent from home in his vessel. On this particular
day it was nearly three months since they had met.

"The Sunday before, young Sandy MacNair had been in Carlyle church. He
had risen at dawn that morning, walked bare-footed for eight miles along
the shore, carrying his shoes, hired a harbour fisherman to row him over
the channel, and then walked eight miles more to the church at Carlyle,
less, it is to be feared, from a zeal for holy things than that he might
do an errand for his adored brother, Kenneth. He carried a letter which
he contrived to pass into Ursula's hand in the crowd as the people came
out. This letter asked Ursula to meet Kenneth in the beechwood the
next afternoon, and so she stole away there when suspicious father and
watchful stepmother thought she was spinning in the granary loft."

"It was very wrong of her to deceive her parents," said Felicity primly.

The Story Girl couldn't deny this, so she evaded the ethical side of the
question skilfully.

"I am not telling you what Ursula Townley ought to have done," she said
loftily. "I am only telling you what she DID do. If you don't want to
hear it you needn't listen, of course. There wouldn't be many stories to
tell if nobody ever did anything she shouldn't do.

"Well, when Kenneth came, the meeting was just what might have been
expected between two lovers who had taken their last kiss three months
before. So it was a good half-hour before Ursula said,

"'Oh, Kenneth, I cannot stay long--I shall be missed. You said in your
letter that you had something important to talk of. What is it?'

"'My news is this, Ursula. Next Saturday morning my vessel, The Fair
Lady, with her captain on board, sails at dawn from Charlottetown
harbour, bound for Buenos Ayres. At this season this means a safe and
sure return--next May.'

"'Kenneth!' cried Ursula. She turned pale and burst into tears. 'How can
you think of leaving me? Oh, you are cruel!'

"'Why, no, sweetheart,' laughed Kenneth. 'The captain of The Fair Lady
will take his bride with him. We'll spend our honeymoon on the high
seas, Ursula, and the cold Canadian winter under southern palms.'

"'You want me to run away with you, Kenneth?' exclaimed Ursula.

"'Indeed, dear girl, there's nothing else to do!'

"'Oh, I cannot!' she protested. 'My father would--'

"'We'll not consult him--until afterward. Come, Ursula, you know there's
no other way. We've always known it must come to this. YOUR father will
never forgive me for MY father. You won't fail me now. Think of the
long parting if you send me away alone on such a voyage. Pluck up your
courage, and we'll let Townleys and MacNairs whistle their mouldy feuds
down the wind while we sail southward in The Fair Lady. I have a plan.'

"'Let me hear it,' said Ursula, beginning to get back her breath.

"'There is to be a dance at The Springs Friday night. Are you invited,
Ursula?'

"'Yes.'

"'Good. I am not--but I shall be there--in the fir grove behind the
house, with two horses. When the dancing is at its height you'll steal
out to meet me. Then 'tis but a fifteen mile ride to Charlottetown,
where a good minister, who is a friend of mine, will be ready to marry
us. By the time the dancers have tired their heels you and I will be on
our vessel, able to snap our fingers at fate.'

"'And what if I do not meet you in the fir grove?' said Ursula, a little
impertinently.

"'If you do not, I'll sail for South America the next morning, and many
a long year will pass ere Kenneth MacNair comes home again.'

"Perhaps Kenneth didn't mean that, but Ursula thought he did, and it
decided her. She agreed to run away with him. Yes, of course that was
wrong, too, Felicity. She ought to have said, 'No, I shall be married
respectably from home, and have a wedding and a silk dress and
bridesmaids and lots of presents.' But she didn't. She wasn't as prudent
as Felicity King would have been."

"She was a shameless hussy," said Felicity, venting on the long-dead
Ursula that anger she dare not visit on the Story Girl.

"Oh, no, Felicity dear, she was just a lass of spirit. I'd have done the
same. And when Friday night came she began to dress for the dance with
a brave heart. She was to go to The Springs with her uncle and aunt,
who were coming on horseback that afternoon, and would then go on to The
Springs in old Hugh's carriage, which was the only one in Carlyle then.
They were to leave in time to reach The Springs before nightfall, for
the October nights were dark and the wooded roads rough for travelling.

"When Ursula was ready she looked at herself in the glass with a good
deal of satisfaction. Yes, Felicity, she was a vain baggage, that same
Ursula, but that kind didn't all die out a hundred years ago. And she
had good reason for being vain. She wore the sea-green silk which had
been brought out from England a year before and worn but once--at the
Christmas ball at Government House. A fine, stiff, rustling silk it was,
and over it shone Ursula's crimson cheeks and gleaming eyes, and masses
of nut brown hair.

"As she turned from the glass she heard her father's voice below, loud
and angry. Growing very pale, she ran out into the hall. Her father was
already half way upstairs, his face red with fury. In the hall below
Ursula saw her step-mother, looking troubled and vexed. At the door
stood Malcolm Ramsay, a homely neighbour youth who had been courting
Ursula in his clumsy way ever since she grew up. Ursula had always hated
him.

"'Ursula!' shouted old Hugh, 'come here and tell this scoundrel he lies.
He says that you met Kenneth MacNair in the beechgrove last Tuesday.
Tell him he lies! Tell him he lies!'

"Ursula was no coward. She looked scornfully at poor Ramsay.

"'The creature is a spy and a tale-bearer,' she said, 'but in this he
does not lie. I DID meet Kenneth MacNair last Tuesday.'

"'And you dare to tell me this to my face!' roared old Hugh. 'Back to
your room, girl! Back to your room and stay there! Take off that finery.
You go to no more dances. You shall stay in that room until I choose to
let you out. No, not a word! I'll put you there if you don't go. In with
you--ay, and take your knitting with you. Occupy yourself with that this
evening instead of kicking your heels at The Springs!'

"He snatched a roll of gray stocking from the hall table and flung
it into Ursula's room. Ursula knew she would have to follow it, or be
picked up and carried in like a naughty child. So she gave the miserable
Ramsay a look that made him cringe, and swept into her room with her
head in the air. The next moment she heard the door locked behind
her. Her first proceeding was to have a cry of anger and shame and
disappointment. That did no good, and then she took to marching up and
down her room. It did not calm her to hear the rumble of the carriage
out of the gate as her uncle and aunt departed.

"'Oh, what's to be done?' she sobbed. 'Kenneth will be furious. He will
think I have failed him and he will go away hot with anger against me.
If I could only send a word of explanation I know he would not leave me.
But there seems to be no way at all--though I have heard that there's
always a way when there's a will. Oh, I shall go mad! If the window
were not so high I would jump out of it. But to break my legs or my neck
would not mend the matter.'

"The afternoon passed on. At sunset Ursula heard hoof-beats and ran to
the window. Andrew Kinnear of The Springs was tying his horse at the
door. He was a dashing young fellow, and a political crony of old Hugh.
No doubt he would be at the dance that night. Oh, if she could get
speech for but a moment with him!

"When he had gone into the house, Ursula, turning impatiently from the
window, tripped and almost fell over the big ball of homespun yarn
her father had flung on the floor. For a moment she gazed at it
resentfully--then, with a gay little laugh, she pounced on it. The next
moment she was at her table, writing a brief note to Kenneth MacNair.
When it was written, Ursula unwound the gray ball to a considerable
depth, pinned the note on it, and rewound the yarn over it. A gray
ball, the color of the twilight, might escape observation, where a white
missive fluttering down from an upper window would surely be seen by
someone. Then she softly opened her window and waited.

"It was dusk when Andrew went away. Fortunately old Hugh did not come to
the door with him. As Andrew untied his horse Ursula threw the ball with
such good aim that it struck him, as she had meant it to do, squarely on
the head. Andrew looked up at her window. She leaned out, put her finger
warningly on her lips, pointed to the ball, and nodded. Andrew, looking
somewhat puzzled, picked up the ball, sprang to his saddle, and galloped
off.

"So far, well, thought Ursula. But would Andrew understand? Would he
have wit enough to think of exploring the big, knobby ball for its
delicate secret? And would he be at the dance after all?

"The evening dragged by. Time had never seemed so long to Ursula. She
could not rest or sleep. It was midnight before she heard the patter of
a handful of gravel on her window-panes. In a trice she was leaning out.
Below in the darkness stood Kenneth MacNair.

"'Oh, Kenneth, did you get my letter? And is it safe for you to be
here?'

"'Safe enough. Your father is in bed. I've waited two hours down the
road for his light to go out, and an extra half-hour to put him to
sleep. The horses are there. Slip down and out, Ursula. We'll make
Charlottetown by dawn yet.'

"'That's easier said than done, lad. I'm locked in. But do you go out
behind the new barn and bring the ladder you will find there.'

"Five minutes later, Miss Ursula, hooded and cloaked, scrambled
soundlessly down the ladder, and in five more minutes she and Kenneth
were riding along the road.

"'There's a stiff gallop before us, Ursula,' said Kenneth.

"'I would ride to the world's end with you, Kenneth MacNair,' said
Ursula. Oh, of course she shouldn't have said anything of the sort,
Felicity. But you see people had no etiquette departments in those days.
And when the red sunlight of a fair October dawn was shining over the
gray sea The Fair Lady sailed out of Charlottetown harbour. On her deck
stood Kenneth and Ursula MacNair, and in her hand, as a most precious
treasure, the bride carried a ball of gray homespun yarn."

"Well," said Dan, yawning, "I like that kind of a story. Nobody goes and
dies in it, that's one good thing."

"Did old Hugh forgive Ursula?" I asked.

"The story stopped there in the brown book," said the Story Girl, "but
the Awkward Man says he did, after awhile."

"It must be rather romantic to be run away with," remarked Cecily,
wistfully.

"Don't you get such silly notions in your head, Cecily King," said
Felicity, severely.




CHAPTER III. THE CHRISTMAS HARP


Great was the excitement in the houses of King as Christmas drew nigh.
The air was simply charged with secrets. Everybody was very penurious
for weeks beforehand and hoards were counted scrutinizingly every day.
Mysterious pieces of handiwork were smuggled in and out of sight, and
whispered consultations were held, about which nobody thought of being
jealous, as might have happened at any other time. Felicity was in her
element, for she and her mother were deep in preparations for the
day. Cecily and the Story Girl were excluded from these doings
with indifference on Aunt Janet's part and what seemed ostentatious
complacency on Felicity's. Cecily took this to heart and complained to
me about it.

"I'm one of this family just as much as Felicity is," she said, with as
much indignation as Cecily could feel, "and I don't think she need
shut me out of everything. When I wanted to stone the raisins for the
mince-meat she said, no, she would do it herself, because Christmas
mince-meat was very particular--as if I couldn't stone raisins right!
The airs Felicity puts on about her cooking just make me sick,"
concluded Cecily wrathfully.

"It's a pity she doesn't make a mistake in cooking once in a while
herself," I said. "Then maybe she wouldn't think she knew so much more
than other people."

All parcels that came in the mail from distant friends were taken charge
of by Aunts Janet and Olivia, not to be opened until the great day of
the feast itself. How slowly the last week passed! But even watched pots
will boil in the fulness of time, and finally Christmas day came, gray
and dour and frost-bitten without, but full of revelry and rose-red
mirth within. Uncle Roger and Aunt Olivia and the Story Girl came over
early for the day; and Peter came too, with his shining, morning face,
to be hailed with joy, for we had been afraid that Peter would not be
able to spend Christmas with us. His mother had wanted him home with
her.

"Of course I ought to go," Peter had told me mournfully, "but we won't
have turkey for dinner, because ma can't afford it. And ma always cries
on holidays because she says they make her think of father. Of course
she can't help it, but it ain't cheerful. Aunt Jane wouldn't have cried.
Aunt Jane used to say she never saw the man who was worth spoiling her
eyes for. But I guess I'll have to spend Christmas at home."

At the last moment, however, a cousin of Mrs. Craig's in Charlottetown
invited her for Christmas, and Peter, being given his choice of going or
staying, joyfully elected to stay. So we were all together, except Sara
Ray, who had been invited but whose mother wouldn't let her come.

"Sara Ray's mother is a nuisance," snapped the Story Girl. "She just
lives to make that poor child miserable, and she won't let her go to the
party tonight, either."

"It is just breaking Sara's heart that she can't," said Cecily
compassionately. "I'm almost afraid I won't enjoy myself for thinking of
her, home there alone, most likely reading the Bible, while we're at the
party."

"She might be worse occupied than reading the Bible," said Felicity
rebukingly.

"But Mrs. Ray makes her read it as a punishment," protested Cecily.
"Whenever Sara cries to go anywhere--and of course she'll cry
tonight--Mrs. Ray makes her read seven chapters in the Bible. I wouldn't
think that would make her very fond of it. And I'll not be able to talk
the party over with Sara afterwards--and that's half the fun gone."

"You can tell her all about it," comforted Felix.

"Telling isn't a bit like talking it over," retorted Cecily. "It's too
one-sided."

We had an exciting time opening our presents. Some of us had more than
others, but we all received enough to make us feel comfortably that we
were not unduly neglected in the matter. The contents of the box which
the Story Girl's father had sent her from Paris made our eyes stick out.
It was full of beautiful things, among them another red silk dress--not
the bright, flame-hued tint of her old one, but a rich, dark crimson,
with the most distracting flounces and bows and ruffles; and with it
were little red satin slippers with gold buckles, and heels that made
Aunt Janet hold up her hands in horror. Felicity remarked scornfully
that she would have thought the Story Girl would get tired wearing red
so much, and even Cecily commented apart to me that she thought when
you got so many things all at once you didn't appreciate them as much as
when you only got a few.

"I'd never get tired of red," said the Story Girl. "I just love it--it's
so rich and glowing. When I'm dressed in red I always feel ever so much
cleverer than in any other colour. Thoughts just crowd into my brain
one after the other. Oh, you darling dress--you dear, sheeny, red-rosy,
glistening, silky thing!"

She flung it over her shoulder and danced around the kitchen.

"Don't be silly, Sara," said Aunt Janet, a little stimy. She was a good
soul, that Aunt Janet, and had a kind, loving heart in her ample bosom.
But I fancy there were times when she thought it rather hard that the
daughter of a roving adventurer--as she considered him--like Blair
Stanley should disport herself in silk dresses, while her own daughters
must go clad in gingham and muslin--for those were the days when a
feminine creature got one silk dress in her lifetime, and seldom more
than one.

The Story Girl also got a present from the Awkward Man--a little,
shabby, worn volume with a great many marks on the leaves.

"Why, it isn't new--it's an old book!" exclaimed Felicity. "I didn't
think the Awkward Man was mean, whatever else he was."

"Oh, you don't understand, Felicity," said the Story Girl patiently.
"And I don't suppose I can make you understand. But I'll try. I'd ten
times rather have this than a new book. It's one of his own, don't you
see--one that he has read a hundred times and loved and made a friend
of. A new book, just out of a shop, wouldn't be the same thing at all.
It wouldn't MEAN anything. I consider it a great compliment that he has
given me this book. I'm prouder of it than of anything else I've got."

"Well, you're welcome to it," said Felicity. "I don't understand and I
don't want to. I wouldn't give anybody a Christmas present that wasn't
new, and I wouldn't thank anybody who gave me one."

Peter was in the seventh heaven because Felicity had given him a
present--and, moreover, one that she had made herself. It was a bookmark
of perforated cardboard, with a gorgeous red and yellow worsted goblet
worked on it, and below, in green letters, the solemn warning, "Touch
Not The Cup." As Peter was not addicted to habits of intemperance, not
even to looking on dandelion wine when it was pale yellow, we did not
exactly see why Felicity should have selected such a device. But Peter
was perfectly satisfied, so nobody cast any blight on his happiness by
carping criticism. Later on Felicity told me she had worked the bookmark
for him because his father used to drink before he ran away.

"I thought Peter ought to be warned in time," she said.

Even Pat had a ribbon of blue, which he clawed off and lost half an hour
after it was tied on him. Pat did not care for vain adornments of the
body.

We had a glorious Christmas dinner, fit for the halls of Lucullus, and
ate far more than was good for us, none daring to make us afraid on that
one day of the year. And in the evening--oh, rapture and delight!--we
went to Kitty Marr's party.

It was a fine December evening; the sharp air of morning had mellowed
until it was as mild as autumn. There had been no snow, and the long
fields, sloping down from the homestead, were brown and mellow. A weird,
dreamy stillness had fallen on the purple earth, the dark fir woods, the
valley rims, the sere meadows. Nature seemed to have folded satisfied
hands to rest, knowing that her long wintry slumber was coming upon her.

At first, when the invitations to the party had come, Aunt Janet had
said we could not go; but Uncle Alec interceded in our favour, perhaps
influenced thereto by Cecily's wistful eyes. If Uncle Alec had a
favourite among his children it was Cecily, and he had grown even more
indulgent towards her of late. Now and then I saw him looking at her
intently, and, following his eyes and thought, I had, somehow, seen that
Cecily was paler and thinner than she had been in the summer, and that
her soft eyes seemed larger, and that over her little face in moments of
repose there was a certain languor and weariness that made it very sweet
and pathetic. And I heard him tell Aunt Janet that he did not like to
see the child getting so much the look of her Aunt Felicity.

"Cecily is perfectly well," said Aunt Janet sharply. "She's only growing
very fast. Don't be foolish, Alec."

But after that Cecily had cups of cream where the rest of us got only
milk; and Aunt Janet was very particular to see that she had her rubbers
on whenever she went out.

On this merry Christmas evening, however, no fears or dim foreshadowings
of any coming event clouded our hearts or faces. Cecily looked brighter
and prettier than I had ever seen her, with her softly shining eyes and
the nut brown gloss of her hair. Felicity was too beautiful for words;
and even the Story Girl, between excitement and the crimson silk array,
blossomed out with a charm and allurement more potent than any regular
loveliness--and this in spite of the fact that Aunt Olivia had tabooed
the red satin slippers and mercilessly decreed that stout shoes should
be worn.

"I know just how you feel about it, you daughter of Eve," she said, with
gay sympathy, "but December roads are damp, and if you are going to
walk to Marrs' you are not going to do it in those frivolous Parisian
concoctions, even with overboots on; so be brave, dear heart, and show
that you have a soul above little red satin shoes."

"Anyhow," said Uncle Roger, "that red silk dress will break the hearts
of all the feminine small fry at the party. You'd break their spirits,
too, if you wore the slippers. Don't do it, Sara. Leave them one wee
loophole of enjoyment."

"What does Uncle Roger mean?" whispered Felicity.

"He means you girls are all dying of jealousy because of the Story
Girl's dress," said Dan.

"I am not of a jealous disposition," said Felicity loftily, "and she's
entirely welcome to the dress--with a complexion like that."

But we enjoyed that party hugely, every one of us. And we enjoyed the
walk home afterwards, through dim, enshadowed fields where silvery
star-beams lay, while Orion trod his stately march above us, and a red
moon climbed up the black horizon's rim. A brook went with us part of
the way, singing to us through the dark--a gay, irresponsible vagabond
of valley and wilderness.

Felicity and Peter walked not with us. Peter's cup must surely have
brimmed over that Christmas night. When we left the Marr house, he had
boldly said to Felicity, "May I see you home?" And Felicity, much to our
amazement, had taken his arm and marched off with him. The primness
of her was indescribable, and was not at all ruffled by Dan's hoot of
derision. As for me, I was consumed by a secret and burning desire to
ask the Story Girl if I might see HER home; but I could not screw my
courage to the sticking point. How I envied Peter his easy, insouciant
manner! I could not emulate him, so Dan and Felix and Cecily and the
Story Girl and I all walked hand in hand, huddling a little closer
together as we went through James Frewen's woods--for there are strange
harps in a fir grove, and who shall say what fingers sweep them? Mighty
and sonorous was the music above our heads as the winds of the night
stirred the great boughs tossing athwart the starlit sky. Perhaps it was
that aeolian harmony which recalled to the Story Girl a legend of elder
days.

"I read such a pretty story in one of Aunt Olivia's books last night,"
she said. "It was called 'The Christmas Harp.' Would you like to hear
it? It seems to me it would just suit this part of the road."

"There isn't anything about--about ghosts in it, is there?" said Cecily
timidly.

"Oh, no, I wouldn't tell a ghost story here for anything. I'd frighten
myself too much. This story is about one of the shepherds who saw the
angels on the first Christmas night. He was just a youth, and he loved
music with all his heart, and he longed to be able to express the melody
that was in his soul. But he could not; he had a harp and he often tried
to play on it; but his clumsy fingers only made such discord that
his companions laughed at him and mocked him, and called him a madman
because he would not give it up, but would rather sit apart by himself,
with his arms about his harp, looking up into the sky, while they
gathered around their fire and told tales to wile away their long night
vigils as they watched their sheep on the hills. But to him the thoughts
that came out of the great silence were far sweeter than their mirth;
and he never gave up the hope, which sometimes left his lips as a
prayer, that some day he might be able to express those thoughts in
music to the tired, weary, forgetful world. On the first Christmas night
he was out with his fellow shepherds on the hills. It was chill and
dark, and all, except him, were glad to gather around the fire. He sat,
as usual, by himself, with his harp on his knee and a great longing in
his heart. And there came a marvellous light in the sky and over the
hills, as if the darkness of the night had suddenly blossomed into a
wonderful meadow of flowery flame; and all the shepherds saw the angels
and heard them sing. And as they sang, the harp that the young shepherd
held began to play softly by itself, and as he listened to it he
realized that it was playing the same music that the angels sang
and that all his secret longings and aspirations and strivings were
expressed in it. From that night, whenever he took the harp in his
hands, it played the same music; and he wandered all over the world
carrying it; wherever the sound of its music was heard hate and discord
fled away and peace and good-will reigned. No one who heard it could
think an evil thought; no one could feel hopeless or despairing or
bitter or angry. When a man had once heard that music it entered into
his soul and heart and life and became a part of him for ever. Years
went by; the shepherd grew old and bent and feeble; but still he
roamed over land and sea, that his harp might carry the message of the
Christmas night and the angel song to all mankind. At last his strength
failed him and he fell by the wayside in the darkness; but his harp
played as his spirit passed; and it seemed to him that a Shining One
stood by him, with wonderful starry eyes, and said to him, 'Lo, the
music thy harp has played for so many years has been but the echo of the
love and sympathy and purity and beauty in thine own soul; and if at any
time in the wanderings thou hadst opened the door of that soul to evil
or envy or selfishness thy harp would have ceased to play. Now thy life
is ended; but what thou hast given to mankind has no end; and as long as
the world lasts, so long will the heavenly music of the Christmas harp
ring in the ears of men.' When the sun rose the old shepherd lay dead by
the roadside, with a smile on his face; and in his hands was a harp with
all its strings broken."

We left the fir woods as the tale was ended, and on the opposite hill
was home. A dim light in the kitchen window betokened that Aunt Janet
had no idea of going to bed until all her young fry were safely housed
for the night.

"Ma's waiting up for us," said Dan. "I'd laugh if she happened to go to
the door just as Felicity and Peter were strutting up. I guess she'll be
cross. It's nearly twelve."

"Christmas will soon be over," said Cecily, with a sigh. "Hasn't it
been a nice one? It's the first we've all spent together. Do you suppose
we'll ever spend another together?"

"Lots of 'em," said Dan cheerily. "Why not?"

"Oh, I don't know," answered Cecily, her footsteps lagging somewhat.
"Only things seem just a little too pleasant to last."

"If Willy Fraser had had as much spunk as Peter, Miss Cecily King
mightn't be so low spirited," quoth Dan, significantly.

Cecily tossed her head and disdained reply. There are really some
remarks a self-respecting young lady must ignore.




CHAPTER IV. NEW YEAR RESOLUTIONS


If we did not have a white Christmas we had a white New Year. Midway
between the two came a heavy snowfall. It was winter in our orchard of
old delights then,--so truly winter that it was hard to believe summer
had ever dwelt in it, or that spring would ever return to it. There were
no birds to sing the music of the moon; and the path where the apple
blossoms had fallen were heaped with less fragrant drifts. But it was a
place of wonder on a moonlight night, when the snowy arcades shone
like avenues of ivory and crystal, and the bare trees cast fairy-like
traceries upon them. Over Uncle Stephen's Walk, where the snow had
fallen smoothly, a spell of white magic had been woven. Taintless and
wonderful it seemed, like a street of pearl in the new Jerusalem.

On New Year's Eve we were all together in Uncle Alec's kitchen, which
was tacitly given over to our revels during the winter evenings. The
Story Girl and Peter were there, of course, and Sara Ray's mother had
allowed her to come up on condition that she should be home by eight
sharp. Cecily was glad to see her, but the boys never hailed her arrival
with over-much delight, because, since the dark began to come down
early, Aunt Janet always made one of us walk down home with her. We
hated this, because Sara Ray was always so maddeningly self-conscious
of having an escort. We knew perfectly well that next day in school she
would tell her chums as a "dead" secret that "So-and-So King saw her
home" from the hill farm the night before. Now, seeing a young lady home
from choice, and being sent home with her by your aunt or mother are two
entirely different things, and we thought Sara Ray ought to have sense
enough to know it.

Outside there was a vivid rose of sunset behind the cold hills of fir,
and the long reaches of snowy fields glowed fairily pink in the western
light. The drifts along the edges of the meadows and down the lane
looked as if a series of breaking waves had, by the lifting of a
magician's wand, been suddenly transformed into marble, even to their
toppling curls of foam.

Slowly the splendour died, giving place to the mystic beauty of a winter
twilight when the moon is rising. The hollow sky was a cup of blue. The
stars came out over the white glens and the earth was covered with a
kingly carpet for the feet of the young year to press.

"I'm so glad the snow came," said the Story Girl. "If it hadn't the New
Year would have seemed just as dingy and worn out as the old. There's
something very solemn about the idea of a New Year, isn't there? Just
think of three hundred and sixty-five whole days, with not a thing
happened in them yet."

"I don't suppose anything very wonderful will happen in them," said
Felix pessimistically. To Felix, just then, life was flat, stale and
unprofitable because it was his turn to go home with Sara Ray.

"It makes me a little frightened to think of all that may happen in
them," said Cecily. "Miss Marwood says it is what we put into a year,
not what we get out of it, that counts at last."

"I'm always glad to see a New Year," said the Story Girl. "I wish we
could do as they do in Norway. The whole family sits up until midnight,
and then, just as the clock is striking twelve, the father opens the
door and welcomes the New Year in. Isn't it a pretty custom?"

"If ma would let us stay up till twelve we might do that too," said Dan,
"but she never will. I call it mean."

"If I ever have children I'll let them stay up to watch the New Year
in," said the Story Girl decidedly.

"So will I," said Peter, "but other nights they'll have to go to bed at
seven."

"You ought to be ashamed, speaking of such things," said Felicity, with
a scandalized face.

Peter shrank into the background abashed, no doubt believing that he had
broken some Family Guide precept all to pieces.

"I didn't know it wasn't proper to mention children," he muttered
apologetically.

"We ought to make some New Year resolutions," suggested the Story Girl.
"New Year's Eve is the time to make them."

"I can't think of any resolutions I want to make," said Felicity, who
was perfectly satisfied with herself.

"I could suggest a few to you," said Dan sarcastically.

"There are so many I would like to make," said Cecily, "that I'm afraid
it wouldn't be any use trying to keep them all."

"Well, let's all make a few, just for the fun of it, and see if we can
keep them," I said. "And let's get paper and ink and write them out.
That will make them seem more solemn and binding."

"And then pin them up on our bedroom walls, where we'll see them every
day," suggested the Story Girl, "and every time we break a resolution
we must put a cross opposite it. That will show us what progress we are
making, as well as make us ashamed if we have too many crosses."

"And let's have a Roll of Honour in Our Magazine," suggested Felix, "and
every month we'll publish the names of those who keep their resolutions
perfect."

"I think it's all nonsense," said Felicity. But she joined our circle
around the table, though she sat for a long time with a blank sheet
before her.

"Let's each make a resolution in turn," I said. "I'll lead off."

And, recalling with shame certain unpleasant differences of opinion I
had lately had with Felicity, I wrote down in my best hand,

"I shall try to keep my temper always."

"You'd better," said Felicity tactfully.

It was Dan's turn next.

"I can't think of anything to start with," he said, gnawing his
penholder fiercely.

"You might make a resolution not to eat poison berries," suggested
Felicity.

"You'd better make one not to nag people everlastingly," retorted Dan.

"Oh, don't quarrel the last night of the old year," implored Cecily.

"You might resolve not to quarrel any time," suggested Sara Ray.

"No, sir," said Dan emphatically. "There's no use making a resolution
you CAN'T keep. There are people in this family you've just GOT to
quarrel with if you want to live. But I've thought of one--I won't do
things to spite people."

Felicity--who really was in an unbearable mood that night--laughed
disagreeably; but Cecily gave her a fierce nudge, which probably
restrained her from speaking.

"I will not eat any apples," wrote Felix.

"What on earth do you want to give up eating apples for?" asked Peter in
astonishment.

"Never mind," returned Felix.

"Apples make people fat, you know," said Felicity sweetly.

"It seems a funny kind of resolution," I said doubtfully. "I think our
resolutions ought to be giving up wrong things or doing right ones."

"You make your resolutions to suit yourself and I'll make mine to suit
myself," said Felix defiantly.

"I shall never get drunk," wrote Peter painstakingly.

"But you never do," said the Story Girl in astonishment.

"Well, it will be all the easier to keep the resolution," argued Peter.

"That isn't fair," complained Dan. "If we all resolved not to do the
things we never do we'd all be on the Roll of Honour."

"You let Peter alone," said Felicity severely. "It's a very good
resolution and one everybody ought to make."

"I shall not be jealous," wrote the Story Girl.

"But are you?" I asked, surprised.

The Story Girl coloured and nodded. "Of one thing," she confessed, "but
I'm not going to tell what it is."

"I'm jealous sometimes, too," confessed Sara Ray, "and so my first
resolution will be 'I shall try not to feel jealous when I hear the
other girls in school describing all the sick spells they've had.'"

"Goodness, do you want to be sick?" demanded Felix in astonishment.

"It makes a person important," explained Sara Ray.

"I am going to try to improve my mind by reading good books and
listening to older people," wrote Cecily.

"You got that out of the Sunday School paper," cried Felicity.

"It doesn't matter where I got it," said Cecily with dignity. "The main
thing is to keep it."

"It's your turn, Felicity," I said.

Felicity tossed her beautiful golden head.

"I told you I wasn't going to make any resolutions. Go on yourself."

"I shall always study my grammar lesson," I wrote--I, who loathed
grammar with a deadly loathing.

"I hate grammar too," sighed Sara Ray. "It seems so unimportant."

Sara was rather fond of a big word, but did not always get hold of the
right one. I rather suspected that in the above instance she really
meant uninteresting.

"I won't get mad at Felicity, if I can help it," wrote Dan.

"I'm sure I never do anything to make you mad," exclaimed Felicity.

"I don't think it's polite to make resolutions about your sisters," said
Peter.

"He can't keep it anyway," scoffed Felicity. "He's got such an awful
temper."

"It's a family failing," flashed Dan, breaking his resolution ere the
ink on it was dry.

"There you go," taunted Felicity.

"I'll work all my arithmetic problems without any help," scribbled
Felix.

"I wish I could resolve that, too," sighed Sara Ray, "but it wouldn't be
any use. I'd never be able to do those compound multiplication sums the
teacher gives us to do at home every night if I didn't get Judy Pineau
to help me. Judy isn't a good reader and she can't spell AT ALL, but you
can't stick her in arithmetic as far as she went herself. I feel sure,"
concluded poor Sara, in a hopeless tone, "that I'll NEVER be able to
understand compound multiplication."


          "'Multiplication is vexation,
               Division is as bad,
           The rule of three perplexes me,
               And fractions drive me mad,'"


quoted Dan.

"I haven't got as far as fractions yet," sighed Sara, "and I hope I'll
be too big to go to school before I do. I hate arithmetic, but I am
PASSIONATELY fond of geography."

"I will not play tit-tat-x on the fly leaves of my hymn book in church,"
wrote Peter.

"Mercy, did you ever do such a thing?" exclaimed Felicity in horror.

Peter nodded shamefacedly.

"Yes--that Sunday Mr. Bailey preached. He was so long-winded, I got
awful tired, and, anyway, he was talking about things I couldn't
understand, so I played tit-tat-x with one of the Markdale boys. It was
the day I was sitting up in the gallery."

"Well, I hope if you ever do the like again you won't do it in OUR pew,"
said Felicity severely.

"I ain't going to do it at all," said Peter. "I felt sort of mean all
the rest of the day."

"I shall try not to be vexed when people interrupt me when I'm telling
stories," wrote the Story Girl. "but it will be hard," she added with a
sigh.

"I never mind being interrupted," said Felicity.

"I shall try to be cheerful and smiling all the time," wrote Cecily.

"You are, anyway," said Sara Ray loyally.

"I don't believe we ought to be cheerful ALL the time," said the Story
Girl. "The Bible says we ought to weep with those who weep."

"But maybe it means that we're to weep cheerfully," suggested Cecily.

"Sorter as if you were thinking, 'I'm very sorry for you but I'm mighty
glad I'm not in the scrape too,'" said Dan.

"Dan, don't be irreverent," rebuked Felicity.

"I know a story about old Mr. and Mrs. Davidson of Markdale," said
the Story Girl. "She was always smiling and it used to aggravate her
husband, so one day he said very crossly, 'Old lady, what ARE you
grinning at?' 'Oh, well, Abiram, everything's so bright and pleasant,
I've just got to smile.'

"Not long after there came a time when everything went wrong--the crop
failed and their best cow died, and Mrs. Davidson had rheumatism; and
finally Mr. Davidson fell and broke his leg. But still Mrs. Davidson
smiled. 'What in the dickens are you grinning about now, old lady?'
he demanded. 'Oh, well, Abiram,' she said, 'everything is so dark and
unpleasant I've just got to smile.' 'Well,' said the old man crossly, 'I
think you might give your face a rest sometimes.'"

"I shall not talk gossip," wrote Sara Ray with a satisfied air.

"Oh, don't you think that's a little TOO strict?" asked Cecily
anxiously. "Of course, it's not right to talk MEAN gossip, but the
harmless kind doesn't hurt. If I say to you that Emmy MacPhail is going
to get a new fur collar this winter, THAT is harmless gossip, but if I
say I don't see how Emmy MacPhail can afford a new fur collar when her
father can't pay my father for the oats he got from him, that would be
MEAN gossip. If I were you, Sara, I'd put MEAN gossip."

Sara consented to this amendment.

"I will be polite to everybody," was my third resolution, which passed
without comment.

"I'll try not to use slang since Cecily doesn't like it," wrote Dan.

"I think some slang is real cute," said Felicity.

"The Family Guide says it's very vulgar," grinned Dan. "Doesn't it, Sara
Stanley?"

"Don't disturb me," said the Story Girl dreamily. "I'm just thinking a
beautiful thought."

"I've thought of a resolution to make," cried Felicity. "Mr. Marwood
said last Sunday we should always try to think beautiful thoughts and
then our lives would be very beautiful. So I shall resolve to think a
beautiful thought every morning before breakfast."

"Can you only manage one a day?" queried Dan.

"And why before breakfast?" I asked.

"Because it's easier to think on an empty stomach," said Peter, in all
good faith. But Felicity shot a furious glance at him.

"I selected that time," she explained with dignity, "because when I'm
brushing my hair before my glass in the morning I'll see my resolution
and remember it."

"Mr. Marwood meant that ALL our thoughts ought to be beautiful," said
the Story Girl. "If they were, people wouldn't be afraid to say what
they think."

"They oughtn't to be afraid to, anyhow," said Felix stoutly. "I'm going
to make a resolution to say just what I think always."

"And do you expect to get through the year alive if you do?" asked Dan.

"It might be easy enough to say what you think if you could always be
sure just what you DO think," said the Story Girl. "So often I can't be
sure."

"How would you like it if people always said just what they think to
you?" asked Felicity.

"I'm not very particular what SOME people think of me," rejoined Felix.

"I notice you don't like to be told by anybody that you're fat,"
retorted Felicity.

"Oh, dear me, I do wish you wouldn't all say such sarcastic things to
each other," said poor Cecily plaintively. "It sounds so horrid the last
night of the old year. Dear knows where we'll all be this night next
year. Peter, it's your turn."

"I will try," wrote Peter, "to say my prayers every night regular, and
not twice one night because I don't expect to have time the next,--like
I did the night before the party," he added.

"I s'pose you never said your prayers until we got you to go to church,"
said Felicity--who had had no hand in inducing Peter to go to church,
but had stoutly opposed it, as recorded in the first volume of our
family history.

"I did, too," said Peter. "Aunt Jane taught me to say my prayers. Ma
hadn't time, being as father had run away; ma had to wash at night same
as in day-time."

"I shall learn to cook," wrote the Story Girl, frowning.

"You'd better resolve not to make puddings of--" began Felicity, then
stopped as suddenly as if she had bitten off the rest of her sentence
and swallowed it. Cecily had nudged her, so she had probably remembered
the Story Girl's threat that she would never tell another story if she
was ever twitted with the pudding she had made from sawdust. But we all
knew what Felicity had started to say and the Story Girl dealt her a
most uncousinly glance.

"I will not cry because mother won't starch my aprons," wrote Sara Ray.

"Better resolve not to cry about anything," said Dan kindly.

Sara Ray shook her head forlornly.

"That would be too hard to keep. There are times when I HAVE to cry.
It's a relief."

"Not to the folks who have to hear you," muttered Dan aside to Cecily.

"Oh, hush," whispered Cecily back. "Don't go and hurt her feelings the
last night of the old year. Is it my turn again? Well, I'll resolve not
to worry because my hair is not curly. But, oh, I'll never be able to
help wishing it was."

"Why don't you curl it as you used to do, then?" asked Dan.

"You know very well that I've never put my hair up in curl papers since
the time Peter was dying of the measles," said Cecily reproachfully. "I
resolved then I wouldn't because I wasn't sure it was quite right."

"I will keep my finger-nails neat and clean," I wrote. "There, that's
four resolutions. I'm not going to make any more. Four's enough."

"I shall always think twice before I speak," wrote Felix.

"That's an awful waste of time," commented Dan, "but I guess you'll need
to if you're always going to say what you think."

"I'm going to stop with three," said Peter.

"I will have all the good times I can," wrote the Story Girl.

"THAT'S what I call sensible," said Dan.

"It's a very easy resolution to keep, anyhow," commented Felix.

"I shall try to like reading the Bible," wrote Sara Ray.

"You ought to like reading the Bible without trying to," exclaimed
Felicity.

"If you had to read seven chapters of it every time you were naughty I
don't believe you would like it either," retorted Sara Ray with a flash
of spirit.

"I shall try to believe only half of what I hear," was Cecily's
concluding resolution.

"But which half?" scoffed Dan.

"The best half," said sweet Cecily simply.

"I'll try to obey mother ALWAYS," wrote Sara Ray, with a tremendous
sigh, as if she fully realized the difficulty of keeping such a
resolution. "And that's all I'm going to make."

"Felicity has only made one," said the Story Girl.

"I think it better to make just one and keep it than make a lot and
break them," said Felicity loftily.

She had the last word on the subject, for it was time for Sara Ray to
go, and our circle broke up. Sara and Felix departed and we watched
them down the lane in the moonlight--Sara walking demurely in one runner
track, and Felix stalking grimly along in the other. I fear the romantic
beauty of that silver shining night was entirely thrown away on my
mischievous brother.

And it was, as I remember it, a most exquisite night--a white poem, a
frosty, starry lyric of light. It was one of those nights on which one
might fall asleep and dream happy dreams of gardens of mirth and
song, feeling all the while through one's sleep the soft splendour and
radiance of the white moon-world outside, as one hears soft, far-away
music sounding through the thoughts and words that are born of it.

As a matter of fact, however, Cecily dreamed that night that she saw
three full moons in the sky, and wakened up crying with the horror of
it.




CHAPTER V. THE FIRST NUMBER OF "OUR MAGAZINE"


The first number of Our Magazine was ready on New Year's Day, and we
read it that evening in the kitchen. All our staff had worked nobly and
we were enormously proud of the result, although Dan still continued
to scoff at a paper that wasn't printed. The Story Girl and I read it
turnabout while the others, except Felix, ate apples. It opened with a
short


EDITORIAL

With this number Our Magazine makes its first bow to the public. All
the editors have done their best and the various departments are full of
valuable information and amusement. The tastefully designed cover is by
a famous artist, Mr. Blair Stanley, who sent it to us all the way from
Europe at the request of his daughter. Mr. Peter Craig, our enterprising
literary editor, contributes a touching love story. (Peter, aside, in
a gratified pig's whisper: "I never was called 'Mr.' before.") Miss
Felicity King's essays on Shakespeare is none the worse for being an
old school composition, as it is new to most of our readers. Miss
Cecily King contributes a thrilling article of adventure. The various
departments are ably edited, and we feel that we have reason to be proud
of Our Magazine. But we shall not rest on our oars. "Excelsior" shall
ever be our motto. We trust that each succeeding issue will be better
than the one that went before. We are well aware of many defects, but
it is easier to see them than to remedy them. Any suggestion that would
tend to the improvement of Our Magazine will be thankfully received,
but we trust that no criticism will be made that will hurt anyone's
feelings. Let us all work together in harmony, and strive to make Our
Magazine an influence for good and a source of innocent pleasure, and
let us always remember the words of the poet.


  "The heights by great men reached and kept
     Were not attained by sudden flight,
   But they, while their companions slept,
     Were toiling upwards in the night."


(Peter, IMPRESSIVELY:--"I've read many a worse editorial in the
Enterprise.")


ESSAY ON SHAKESPEARE

Shakespeare's full name was William Shakespeare. He did not always spell
it the same way. He lived in the reign of Queen Elizabeth and wrote a
great many plays. His plays are written in dialogue form. Some people
think they were not written by Shakespeare but by another man of the
same name. I have read some of them because our school teacher says
everybody ought to read them, but I did not care much for them. There
are some things in them I cannot understand. I like the stories of
Valeria H. Montague in the Family Guide ever so much better. They are
more exciting and truer to life. Romeo and Juliet was one of the plays I
read. It was very sad. Juliet dies and I don't like stories where people
die. I like it better when they all get married especially to dukes and
earls. Shakespeare himself was married to Anne Hatheway. They are both
dead now. They have been dead a good while. He was a very famous man.

                                     FELICITY KING.


(PETER, MODESTLY: "I don't know much about Shakespeare myself but I've
got a book of his plays that belonged to my Aunt Jane, and I guess I'll
have to tackle him as soon as I finish with the Bible.")


THE STORY OF AN ELOPEMENT FROM CHURCH

This is a true story. It happened in Markdale to an uncle of my mothers.
He wanted to marry Miss Jemima Parr. Felicity says Jemima is not a
romantic name for a heroin of a story but I cant help it in this case
because it is a true story and her name realy was Jemima. My mothers
uncle was named Thomas Taylor. He was poor at that time and so the
father of Miss Jemima Parr did not want him for a soninlaw and told him
he was not to come near the house or he would set the dog on him. Miss
Jemima Parr was very pretty and my mothers uncle Thomas was just crazy
about her and she wanted him too. She cried almost every night after
her father forbid him to come to the house except the nights she had to
sleep or she would have died. And she was so frightened he might try to
come for all and get tore up by the dog and it was a bull-dog too that
would never let go. But mothers uncle Thomas was too cute for that. He
waited till one day there was preaching in the Markdale church in the
middle of the week because it was sacrament time and Miss Jemima Parr
and her family all went because her father was an elder. My mothers
uncle Thomas went too and set in the pew just behind Miss Jemima Parrs
family. When they all bowed their heads at prayer time Miss Jemima Parr
didnt but set bolt uprite and my mothers uncle Thomas bent over and
wispered in her ear. I dont know what he said so I cant right it but
Miss Jemima Parr blushed that is turned red and nodded her head. Perhaps
some people may think that my mothers uncle Thomas shouldent of wispered
at prayer time in church but you must remember that Miss Jemima Parrs
father had thretened to set the dog on him and that was hard lines when
he was a respektable young man though not rich. Well when they were
singing the last sam my mothers uncle Thomas got up and went out very
quitely and as soon as church was out Miss Jemima Parr walked out too
real quick. Her family never suspekted anything and they hung round
talking to folks and shaking hands while Miss Jemima Parr and my mothers
uncle Thomas were eloping outside. And what do you suppose they eloped
in. Why in Miss Jemima Parrs fathers slay. And when he went out they
were gone and his slay was gone also his horse. Of course my mothers
uncle Thomas didnt steal the horse. He just borroed it and sent it home
the next day. But before Miss Jemima Parrs father could get another rig
to follow them they were so far away he couldent catch them before they
got married. And they lived happy together forever afterwards. Mothers
uncle Thomas lived to be a very old man. He died very suddent. He felt
quite well when he went to sleep and when he woke up he was dead.

                                       PETER CRAIG.


MY MOST EXCITING ADVENTURE

The editor says we must all write up our most exciting adventure for Our
Magazine. My most exciting adventure happened a year ago last November.
I was nearly frightened to death. Dan says he wouldn't of been scared
and Felicity says she would of known what it was but it's easy to talk.

It happened the night I went down to see Kitty Marr. I thought when I
went that Aunt Olivia was visiting there and I could come home with her.
But she wasn't there and I had to come home alone. Kitty came a piece
of the way but she wouldn't come any further than Uncle James Frewen's
gate. She said it was because it was so windy she was afraid she would
get the tooth-ache and not because she was frightened of the ghost of
the dog that haunted the bridge in Uncle James' hollow. I did wish she
hadn't said anything about the dog because I mightn't of thought about
it if she hadn't. I had to go on alone thinking of it. I'd heard the
story often but I'd never believed in it. They said the dog used to
appear at one end of the bridge and walk across it with people and
vanish when he got to the other end. He never tried to bite anyone but
one wouldn't want to meet the ghost of a dog even if one didn't believe
in him. I knew there was no such thing as ghosts and I kept saying a
paraphrase over to myself and the Golden Text of the next Sunday School
lesson but oh, how my heart beat when I got near the hollow! It was so
dark. You could just see things dim-like but you couldn't see what they
were. When I got to the bridge I walked along sideways with my back to
the railing so I couldn't think the dog was behind me. And then just in
the middle of the bridge I met something. It was right before me and
it was big and black, just about the size of a Newfoundland dog, and
I thought I could see a white nose. And it kept jumping about from one
side of the bridge to the other. Oh, I hope none of my readers will ever
be so frightened as I was then. I was too frightened to run back because
I was afraid it would chase me and I couldn't get past it, it moved so
quick, and then it just made one spring right on me and I felt its claws
and I screamed and fell down. It rolled off to one side and laid there
quite quiet but I didn't dare move and I don't know what would have
become of me if Amos Cowan hadn't come along that very minute with a
lantern. And there was me sitting in the middle of the bridge and that
awful thing beside me. And what do you think it was but a big umbrella
with a white handle? Amos said it was his umbrella and it had blown away
from him and he had to go back and get the lantern to look for it. I
felt like asking him what on earth he was going about with an umbrella
open when it wasent raining. But the Cowans do such queer things. You
remember the time Jerry Cowan sold us God's picture. Amos took me right
home and I was thankful for I don't know what would have become of me
if he hadn't come along. I couldn't sleep all night and I never want to
have any more adventures like that one.

                                      CECILY KING.


PERSONALS

Mr. Dan King felt somewhat indisposed the day after Christmas--probably
as the result of too much mince pie. (DAN, INDIGNANTLY:--"I wasn't. I
only et one piece!")

Mr. Peter Craig thinks he saw the Family Ghost on Christmas Eve. But
the rest of us think all he saw was the white calf with the red tail.
(PETER, MUTTERING SULKILY:--"It's a queer calf that would walk up on end
and wring its hands.")

Miss Cecily King spent the night of Dec. 20th with Miss Kitty Marr. They
talked most of the night about new knitted lace patterns and their beaus
and were very sleepy in school next day. (CECILY, SHARPLY:--"We never
mentioned such things!")

Patrick Grayfur, Esq., was indisposed yesterday, but seems to be
enjoying his usual health to-day.

The King family expect their Aunt Eliza to visit them in January. She
is really our great-aunt. We have never seen her but we are told she is
very deaf and does not like children. So Aunt Janet says we must make
ourselves scarece when she comes.

Miss Cecily King has undertaken to fill with names a square of the
missionary quilt which the Mission Band is making. You pay five cents
to have your name embroidered in a corner, ten cents to have it in
the centre, and a quarter if you want it left off altogether. (CECILY,
INDIGNANTLY:--"That isn't the way at all.")


ADS.

WANTED--A remedy to make a fat boy thin. Address, "Patient Sufferer,
care of Our Magazine."

(FELIX, SOURLY:--"Sara Ray never got that up. I'll bet it was Dan. He'd
better stick to his own department.")


HOUSEHOLD DEPARTMENT

Mrs. Alexander King killed all her geese the twentieth of December. We
all helped pick them. We had one Christmas Day and will have one every
fortnight the rest of the winter.

The bread was sour last week because mother wouldn't take my advice. I
told her it was too warm for it in the corner behind the stove.

Miss Felicity King invented a new recete for date cookies recently,
which everybody said were excelent. I am not going to publish it though,
because I don't want other people to find it out.

ANXIOUS INQUIRER:--If you want to remove inkstains place the stain
over steam and apply salt and lemon juice. If it was Dan who sent this
question in I'd advise him to stop wiping his pen on his shirt sleeves
and then he wouldn't have so many stains.

                                     FELICITY KING.


ETIQUETTE DEPARTMENT



F-l-x:--Yes, you should offer your arm to a lady when seeing her home,
but don't keep her standing too long at the gate while you say good
night.

(FELIX, ENRAGED:--"I never asked such a question.")

C-c-l-y:--No, it is not polite to use "Holy Moses" or "dodgasted" in
ordinary conversation.

(Cecily had gone down cellar to replenish the apple plate, so this
passed without protest.)

S-r-a:--No, it isn't polite to cry all the time. As to whether you
should ask a young man in, it all depends on whether he went home with
you of his own accord or was sent by some elderly relative.

F-l-t-y:--It does not break any rule of etiquette if you keep a button
off your best young man's coat for a keepsake. But don't take more than
one or his mother might miss them.

                                          DAN KING.


FASHION NOTES

Knitted mufflers are much more stylish than crocheted ones this winter.
It is nice to have one the same colour as your cap.

Red mittens with a black diamond pattern on the back are much run after.
Em Frewen's grandma knits hers for her. She can knit the double diamond
pattern and Em puts on such airs about it, but I think the single
diamond is in better taste.

The new winter hats at Markdale are very pretty. It is so exciting to
pick a hat. Boys can't have that fun. Their hats are so much alike.

                                       CECILY KING.


FUNNY PARAGRAPHS

This is a true joke and really happened.

There was an old local preacher in New Brunswick one time whose name was
Samuel Clask. He used to preach and pray and visit the sick just like a
regular minister. One day he was visiting a neighbour who was dying and
he prayed the Lord to have mercy on him because he was very poor and
had worked so hard all his life that he hadn't much time to attend to
religion.

"And if you don't believe me, O Lord," Mr. Clask finished up with, "just
take a look at his hands."

                                        FELIX KING.


GENERAL INFORMATION BUREAU

DAN:--Do porpoises grow on trees or vines?

Ans. Neither. They inhabit the deep sea.

                                        FELIX KING.


(DAN, AGGRIEVED:--"Well, I'd never heard of porpoises and it sounded
like something that grew. But you needn't have gone and put it in the
paper."

FELIX:--"It isn't any worse than the things you put in about me that I
never asked at all."

CECILY, SOOTHINGLY:--"Oh, well, boys, it's all in fun, and I think Our
Magazine is perfectly elegant."

FELICITY, FAILING TO SEE THE STORY GIRL AND BEVERLEY EXCHANGING WINKS
BEHIND HER BACK:--"It certainly is, though SOME PEOPLE were so opposed
to starting it.")


What harmless, happy fooling it all was! How we laughed as we read and
listened and devoured apples! Blow high, blow low, no wind can ever
quench the ruddy glow of that faraway winter night in our memories. And
though Our Magazine never made much of a stir in the world, or was the
means of hatching any genius, it continued to be capital fun for us
throughout the year.




CHAPTER VI. GREAT-AUNT ELIZA'S VISIT


It was a diamond winter day in February--clear, cold, hard, brilliant.
The sharp blue sky shone, the white fields and hills glittered, the
fringe of icicles around the eaves of Uncle Alec's house sparkled. Keen
was the frost and crisp the snow over our world; and we young fry of the
King households were all agog to enjoy life--for was it not Saturday,
and were we not left all alone to keep house?

Aunt Janet and Aunt Olivia had had their last big "kill" of market
poultry the day before; and early in the morning all our grown-ups set
forth to Charlottetown, to be gone the whole day. They left us many
charges as usual, some of which we remembered and some of which we
forgot; but with Felicity in command none of us dared stray far out of
line. The Story Girl and Peter came over, of course, and we all agreed
that we would haste and get the work done in the forenoon, that we might
have an afternoon of uninterrupted enjoyment. A taffy-pull after dinner
and then a jolly hour of coasting on the hill field before supper were
on our programme. But disappointment was our portion. We did manage to
get the taffy made but before we could sample the result satisfactorily,
and just as the girls were finishing with the washing of the dishes,
Felicity glanced out of the window and exclaimed in tones of dismay,

"Oh, dear me, here's Great-aunt Eliza coming up the lane! Now, isn't
that too mean?"

We all looked out to see a tall, gray-haired lady approaching the house,
looking about her with the slightly puzzled air of a stranger. We had
been expecting Great-aunt Eliza's advent for some weeks, for she was
visiting relatives in Markdale. We knew she was liable to pounce down on
us any time, being one of those delightful folk who like to "surprise"
people, but we had never thought of her coming that particular day. It
must be confessed that we did not look forward to her visit with any
pleasure. None of us had ever seen her, but we knew she was very deaf,
and had very decided opinions as to the way in which children should
behave.

"Whew!" whistled Dan. "We're in for a jolly afternoon. She's deaf as a
post and we'll have to split our throats to make her hear at all. I've a
notion to skin out."

"Oh, don't talk like that, Dan," said Cecily reproachfully. "She's old
and lonely and has had a great deal of trouble. She has buried three
husbands. We must be kind to her and do the best we can to make her
visit pleasant."

"She's coming to the back door," said Felicity, with an agitated glance
around the kitchen. "I told you, Dan, that you should have shovelled the
snow away from the front door this morning. Cecily, set those pots
in the pantry quick--hide those boots, Felix--shut the cupboard door,
Peter--Sara, straighten up the lounge. She's awfully particular and ma
says her house is always as neat as wax."

To do Felicity justice, while she issued orders to the rest of us,
she was flying busily about herself, and it was amazing how much was
accomplished in the way of putting the kitchen in perfect order during
the two minutes in which Great-aunt Eliza was crossing the yard.

"Fortunately the sitting-room is tidy and there's plenty in the pantry,"
said Felicity, who could face anything undauntedly with a well-stocked
larder behind her.

Further conversation was cut short by a decided rap at the door.
Felicity opened it.

"Why, how do you do, Aunt Eliza?" she said loudly.

A slightly bewildered look appeared on Aunt Eliza's face. Felicity
perceived she had not spoken loudly enough.

"How do you do, Aunt Eliza," she repeated at the top of her voice.
"Come in--we are glad to see you. We've been looking for you for ever so
long."

"Are your father and mother at home?" asked Aunt Eliza, slowly.

"No, they went to town today. But they'll be home this evening."

"I'm sorry they're away," said Aunt Eliza, coming in, "because I can
stay only a few hours."

"Oh, that's too bad," shouted poor Felicity, darting an angry glance at
the rest of us, as if to demand why we didn't help her out. "Why, we've
been thinking you'd stay a week with us anyway. You MUST stay over
Sunday."

"I really can't. I have to go to Charlottetown tonight," returned Aunt
Eliza.

"Well, you'll take off your things and stay to tea, at least," urged
Felicity, as hospitably as her strained vocal chords would admit.

"Yes, I think I'll do that. I want to get acquainted with my--my nephews
and nieces," said Aunt Eliza, with a rather pleasant glance around our
group. If I could have associated the thought of such a thing with my
preconception of Great-aunt Eliza I could have sworn there was a twinkle
in her eye. But of course it was impossible. "Won't you introduce
yourselves, please?"

Felicity shouted our names and Great-aunt Eliza shook hands all round.
She performed the duty grimly and I concluded I must have been mistaken
about the twinkle. She was certainly very tall and dignified and
imposing--altogether a great-aunt to be respected.

Felicity and Cecily took her to the spare room and then left her in the
sitting-room while they returned to the kitchen, to discuss the matter
in family conclave.

"Well, and what do you think of dear Aunt Eliza?" asked Dan.

"S-s-s-sh," warned Cecily, with a glance at the half-open hall door.

"Pshaw," scoffed Dan, "she can't hear us. There ought to be a law
against anyone being as deaf as that."

"She's not so old-looking as I expected," said Felix. "If her hair
wasn't so white she wouldn't look much older than your mother."

"You don't have to be very old to be a great-aunt," said Cecily. "Kitty
Marr has a great-aunt who is just the same age as her mother. I expect
it was burying so many husbands turned her hair white. But Aunt Eliza
doesn't look just as I expected she would either."

"She's dressed more stylishly than I expected," said Felicity. "I
thought she'd be real old-fashioned, but her clothes aren't too bad at
all."

"She wouldn't be bad-looking if 'tweren't for her nose," said Peter.
"It's too long, and crooked besides."

"You needn't criticize our relations like that," said Felicity tartly.

"Well, aren't you doing it yourselves?" expostulated Peter.

"That's different," retorted Felicity. "Never you mind Great-aunt
Eliza's nose."

"Well, don't expect me to talk to her," said Dan, "'cause I won't."

"I'm going to be very polite to her," said Felicity. "She's rich. But
how are we to entertain her, that's the question."

"What does the Family Guide say about entertaining your rich, deaf old
aunt?" queried Dan ironically.

"The Family Guide says we should be polite to EVERYBODY," said Cecily,
with a reproachful look at Dan.

"The worst of it is," said Felicity, looking worried, "that there isn't
a bit of old bread in the house and she can't eat new, I've heard father
say. It gives her indigestion. What will we do?"

"Make a pan of rusks and apologize for having no old bread," suggested
the Story Girl, probably by way of teasing Felicity. The latter,
however, took it in all good faith.

"The Family Guide says we should never apologize for things we can't
help. It says it's adding insult to injury to do it. But you run over
home for a loaf of stale bread, Sara, and it's a good idea about the
rusks. I'll make a panful."

"Let me make them," said the Story Girl, eagerly. "I can make real good
rusks now."

"No, it wouldn't do to trust you," said Felicity mercilessly. "You
might make some queer mistake and Aunt Eliza would tell it all over the
country. She's a fearful old gossip. I'll make the rusks myself. She
hates cats, so we mustn't let Paddy be seen. And she's a Methodist, so
mind nobody says anything against Methodists to her."

"Who's going to say anything, anyhow?" asked Peter belligerently.

"I wonder if I might ask her for her name for my quilt square?"
speculated Cecily. "I believe I will. She looks so much friendlier than
I expected. Of course she'll choose the five-cent section. She's an
estimable old lady, but very economical."

"Why don't you say she's so mean she'd skin a flea for its hide and
tallow?" said Dan. "That's the plain truth."

"Well, I'm going to see about getting tea," said Felicity, "so the rest
of you will have to entertain her. You better go in and show her the
photographs in the album. Dan, you do it."

"Thank you, that's a girl's job," said Dan. "I'd look nice sitting up
to Aunt Eliza and yelling out that this was Uncle Jim and 'tother Cousin
Sarah's twins, wouldn't I? Cecily or the Story Girl can do it."

"I don't know all the pictures in your album," said the Story Girl
hastily.

"I s'pose I'll have to do it, though I don't like to," sighed Cecily.
"But we ought to go in. We've left her alone too long now. She'll think
we have no manners."

Accordingly we all filed in rather reluctantly. Great-aunt Eliza
was toasting her toes--clad, as we noted, in very smart and shapely
shoes--at the stove and looking quite at her ease. Cecily, determined to
do her duty even in the face of such fearful odds as Great-aunt Eliza's
deafness, dragged a ponderous, plush-covered album from its corner and
proceeded to display and explain the family photographs. She did her
brave best but she could not shout like Felicity, and half the time, as
she confided to me later on, she felt that Great-aunt Eliza did not hear
one word she said, because she didn't seem to take in who the people
were, though, just like all deaf folks, she wouldn't let on. Great-aunt
Eliza certainly didn't talk much; she looked at the photographs in
silence, but she smiled now and then. That smile bothered me. It was so
twinkly and so very un-great-aunt-Elizaish. But I felt indignant with
her. I thought she might have shown a little more appreciation of
Cecily's gallant efforts to entertain.

It was very dull for the rest of us. The Story Girl sat rather sulkily
in her corner; she was angry because Felicity would not let her make
the rusks, and also, perhaps, a little vexed because she could not charm
Great-aunt Eliza with her golden voice and story-telling gift. Felix
and I looked at each other and wished ourselves out in the hill field,
careering gloriously adown its gleaming crust.

But presently a little amusement came our way. Dan, who was sitting
behind Great-aunt Eliza, and consequently out of her view, began making
comments on Cecily's explanation of this one and that one among the
photographs. In vain Cecily implored him to stop. It was too good fun
to give up. For the next half-hour the dialogue ran after this fashion,
while Peter and Felix and I, and even the Story Girl, suffered agonies
trying to smother our bursts of laughter--for Great-aunt Eliza could see
if she couldn't hear:

CECILY, SHOUTING:--"That is Mr. Joseph Elliott of Markdale, a second
cousin of mother's."

DAN:--"Don't brag of it, Sis. He's the man who was asked if somebody
else said something in sincerity and old Joe said 'No, he said it in my
cellar.'"

CECILY:--"This isn't anybody in our family. It's little Xavy Gautier who
used to be hired with Uncle Roger."

DAN:--"Uncle Roger sent him to fix a gate one day and scolded him
because he didn't do it right, and Xavy was mad as hops and said 'How
you 'spect me to fix dat gate? I never learned jogerfy.'"

CECILY, WITH AN ANGUISHED GLANCE AT DAN:--"This is Great-uncle Robert
King."

DAN:--"He's been married four times. Don't you think that's often
enough, dear great-aunty?"

CECILY:--"(Dan!!) This is a nephew of Mr. Ambrose Marr's. He lives out
west and teaches school."

DAN:--"Yes, and Uncle Roger says he doesn't know enough not to sleep in
a field with the gate open."

CECILY:--"This is Miss Julia Stanley, who used to teach in Carlisle a
few years ago."

DAN:--"When she resigned the trustees had a meeting to see if they'd ask
her to stay and raise her supplement. Old Highland Sandy was alive then
and he got up and said, 'If she for go let her for went. Perhaps she for
marry.'"

CECILY, WITH THE AIR OF A MARTYR:--"This is Mr. Layton, who used to
travel around selling Bibles and hymn books and Talmage's sermons."

DAN:--"He was so thin Uncle Roger used to say he always mistook him for
a crack in the atmosphere. One time he stayed here all night and went to
prayer meeting and Mr. Marwood asked him to lead in prayer. It had been
raining 'most every day for three weeks, and it was just in haymaking
time, and everybody thought the hay was going to be ruined, and old
Layton got up and prayed that God would send gentle showers on the
growing crops, and I heard Uncle Roger whisper to a fellow behind
me, 'If somebody don't choke him off we won't get the hay made this
summer.'"

CECILY, IN EXASPERATION:--"(Dan, shame on you for telling such
irreverent stories.) This is Mrs. Alexander Scott of Markdale. She has
been very sick for a long time."

DAN:--"Uncle Roger says all that keeps her alive is that she's scared
her husband will marry again."

CECILY:--"This is old Mr. James MacPherson who used to live behind the
graveyard."

DAN:--"He's the man who told mother once that he always made his own
iodine out of strong tea and baking soda."

CECILY:--"This is Cousin Ebenezer MacPherson on the Markdale road."

DAN:--"Great temperance man! He never tasted rum in his life. He took
the measles when he was forty-five and was crazy as a loon with them,
and the doctor ordered them to give him a dose of brandy. When he
swallowed it he looked up and says, solemn as an owl, 'Give it to me
oftener and more at a time.'"

CECILY, IMPLORINGLY:--"(Dan, do stop. You make me so nervous I don't
know what I'm doing.) This is Mr. Lemuel Goodridge. He is a minister."

DAN:--"You ought to see his mouth. Uncle Roger says the drawing string
has fell out of it. It just hangs loose--so fashion."

Dan, whose own mouth was far from being beautiful, here gave an
imitation of the Rev. Lemuel's, to the utter undoing of Peter, Felix,
and myself. Our wild guffaws of laughter penetrated even Great-aunt
Eliza's deafness, and she glanced up with a startled face. What we would
have done I do not know had not Felicity at that moment appeared in the
doorway with panic-stricken eyes and exclaimed,

"Cecily, come here for a moment."

Cecily, glad of even a temporary respite, fled to the kitchen and we
heard her demanding what was the matter.

"Matter!" exclaimed Felicity, tragically. "Matter enough! Some of you
left a soup plate with molasses in it on the pantry table and Pat got
into it and what do you think? He went into the spare room and walked
all over Aunt Eliza's things on the bed. You can see his tracks plain as
plain. What in the world can we do? She'll be simply furious."

I looked apprehensively at Great-aunt Eliza; but she was gazing
intently at a picture of Aunt Janet's sister's twins, a most stolid,
uninteresting pair; but evidently Great-aunt Eliza found them amusing
for she was smiling widely over them.

"Let us take a little clean water and a soft bit of cotton," came
Cecily's clear voice from the kitchen, "and see if we can't clean the
molasses off. The coat and hat are both cloth, and molasses isn't like
grease."

"Well, we can try, but I wish the Story Girl would keep her cat home,"
grumbled Felicity.

The Story Girl here flew out to defend her pet, and we four boys sat on,
miserably conscious of Great-aunt Eliza, who never said a word to us,
despite her previously expressed desire to become acquainted with us.
She kept on looking at the photographs and seemed quite oblivious of our
presence.

Presently the girls returned, having, as transpired later, been so
successful in removing the traces of Paddy's mischief that it was not
deemed necessary to worry Great-aunt Eliza with any account of it.
Felicity announced tea and, while Cecily conveyed Great-aunt Eliza out
to the dining-room, lingered behind to consult with us for a moment.

"Ought we to ask her to say grace?" she wanted to know.

"I know a story," said the Story Girl, "about Uncle Roger when he was
just a young man. He went to the house of a very deaf old lady and when
they sat down to the table she asked him to say grace. Uncle Roger had
never done such a thing in his life and he turned as red as a beet
and looked down and muttered, 'E-r-r, please excuse me--I--I'm not
accustomed to doing that.' Then he looked up and the old lady said
'Amen,' loudly and cheerfully. She thought Uncle Roger was saying grace
all the time."

"I don't think it's right to tell funny stories about such things," said
Felicity coldly. "And I asked for your opinion, not for a story."

"If we don't ask her, Felix must say it, for he's the only one who can,
and we must have it, or she'd be shocked."

"Oh, ask her--ask her," advised Felix hastily.

She was asked accordingly and said grace without any hesitation, after
which she proceeded to eat heartily of the excellent supper Felicity had
provided. The rusks were especially good and Great-aunt Eliza ate three
of them and praised them. Apart from that she said little and during the
first part of the meal we sat in embarrassed silence. Towards the last,
however, our tongues were loosened, and the Story Girl told us a tragic
tale of old Charlottetown and a governor's wife who had died of a broken
heart in the early days of the colony.

"They say that story isn't true," said Felicity. "They say what she
really died of was indigestion. The Governor's wife who lives there now
is a relation of our own. She is a second cousin of father's but we've
never seen her. Her name was Agnes Clark. And mind you, when father was
a young man he was dead in love with her and so was she with him."

"Who ever told you that?" exclaimed Dan.

"Aunt Olivia. And I've heard ma teasing father about it, too. Of course,
it was before father got acquainted with mother."

"Why didn't your father marry her?" I asked.

"Well, she just simply wouldn't marry him in the end. She got over being
in love with him. I guess she was pretty fickle. Aunt Olivia said father
felt awful about it for awhile, but he got over it when he met ma.
Ma was twice as good-looking as Agnes Clark. Agnes was a sight for
freckles, so Aunt Olivia says. But she and father remained real good
friends. Just think, if she had married him we would have been the
children of the Governor's wife."

"But she wouldn't have been the Governor's wife then," said Dan.

"I guess it's just as good being father's wife," declared Cecily
loyally.

"You might think so if you saw the Governor," chuckled Dan. "Uncle Roger
says it would be no harm to worship him because he doesn't look like
anything in the heavens above or on the earth beneath or the waters
under the earth."

"Oh, Uncle Roger just says that because he's on the opposite side of
politics," said Cecily. "The Governor isn't really so very ugly. I saw
him at the Markdale picnic two years ago. He's very fat and bald and
red-faced, but I've seen far worse looking men."

"I'm afraid your seat is too near the stove, Aunt Eliza," shouted
Felicity.

Our guest, whose face was certainly very much flushed, shook her head.

"Oh, no, I'm very comfortable," she said. But her voice had the effect
of making us uncomfortable. There was a queer, uncertain little sound
in it. Was Great-aunt Eliza laughing at us? We looked at her sharply
but her face was very solemn. Only her eyes had a suspicious appearance.
Somehow, we did not talk much more the rest of the meal.

When it was over Great-aunt Eliza said she was very sorry but she must
really go. Felicity politely urged her to stay, but was much relieved
when Great-aunt Eliza adhered to her intention of going. When Felicity
took her to the spare room Cecily slipped upstairs and presently came
back with a little parcel in her hand.

"What have you got there?" demanded Felicity suspiciously.

"A--a little bag of rose-leaves," faltered Cecily. "I thought I'd give
them to Aunt Eliza."

"The idea! Don't you do such a thing," said Felicity contemptuously.
"She'd think you were crazy."

"She was awfully nice when I asked her for her name for the quilt,"
protested Cecily, "and she took a ten-cent section after all. So I'd
like to give her the rose-leaves--and I'm going to, too, Miss Felicity."

Great-aunt Eliza accepted the little gift quite graciously, bade us
all good-bye, said she had enjoyed herself very much, left messages for
father and mother, and finally betook herself away. We watched her cross
the yard, tall, stately, erect, and disappear down the lane. Then,
as often aforetime, we gathered together in the cheer of the red
hearth-flame, while outside the wind of a winter twilight sang through
fair white valleys brimmed with a reddening sunset, and a faint, serene,
silver-cold star glimmered over the willow at the gate.

"Well," said Felicity, drawing a relieved breath, "I'm glad she's gone.
She certainly is queer, just as mother said."

"It's a different kind of queerness from what I expected, though," said
the Story Girl meditatively. "There's something I can't quite make out
about Aunt Eliza. I don't think I altogether like her."

"I'm precious sure I don't," said Dan.

"Oh, well, never mind. She's gone now and that's the last of it," said
Cecily comfortingly.

But it wasn't the last of it--not by any manner of means was it! When
our grown-ups returned almost the first words Aunt Janet said were,

"And so you had the Governor's wife to tea?"

We all stared at her.

"I don't know what you mean," said Felicity. "We had nobody to tea
except Great-aunt Eliza. She came this afternoon and--"

"Great-aunt Eliza? Nonsense," said Aunt Janet. "Aunt Eliza was in town
today. She had tea with us at Aunt Louisa's. But wasn't Mrs. Governor
Lesley here? We met her on her way back to Charlottetown and she told
us she was. She said she was visiting a friend in Carlisle and thought
she'd call to see father for old acquaintance sake. What in the world
are all you children staring like that for? Your eyes are like saucers."

"There was a lady here to tea," said Felicity miserably, "but we thought
it was Great-aunt Eliza--she never SAID she wasn't--I thought she acted
queer--and we all yelled at her as if she was deaf--and said things to
each other about her nose--and Pat running over her clothes--"

"She must have heard all you said while I was showing her the
photographs, Dan," cried Cecily.

"And about the Governor at tea time," chuckled unrepentant Dan.

"I want to know what all this means," said Aunt Janet sternly.

She knew in due time, after she had pieced the story together from
our disjointed accounts. She was horrified, and Uncle Alec was mildly
disturbed, but Uncle Roger roared with laughter and Aunt Olivia echoed
it.

"To think you should have so little sense!" said Aunt Janet in a
disgusted tone.

"I think it was real mean of her to pretend she was deaf," said
Felicity, almost on the verge of tears.

"That was Agnes Clark all over," chuckled Uncle Roger. "How she must
have enjoyed this afternoon!"

She had enjoyed it, as we learned the next day, when a letter came from
her.

"Dear Cecily and all the rest of you," wrote the Governor's wife, "I
want to ask you to forgive me for pretending to be Aunt Eliza. I
suspect it was a little horrid of me, but really I couldn't resist the
temptation, and if you will forgive me for it I will forgive you for the
things you said about the Governor, and we will all be good friends. You
know the Governor is a very nice man, though he has the misfortune not
to be handsome.

"I had just a splendid time at your place, and I envy your Aunt Eliza
her nephews and nieces. You were all so nice to me, and I didn't dare
to be a bit nice to you lest I should give myself away. But I'll make
up for that when you come to see me at Government House, as you all must
the very next time you come to town. I'm so sorry I didn't see Paddy,
for I love pussy cats, even if they do track molasses over my clothes.
And, Cecily, thank you ever so much for that little bag of pot-pourri.
It smells like a hundred rose gardens, and I have put it between the
sheets for my very sparest room bed, where you shall sleep when you come
to see me, you dear thing. And the Governor wants you to put his name on
the quilt square, too, in the ten-cent section.

"Tell Dan I enjoyed his comments on the photographs very much. They were
quite a refreshing contrast to the usual explanations of 'who's who.'
And Felicity, your rusks were perfection. Do send me your recipe for
them, there's a darling.

"Yours most cordially,

                                AGNES CLARK LESLEY.


"Well, it was decent of her to apologize, anyhow," commented Dan.

"If we only hadn't said that about the Governor," moaned Felicity.

"How did you make your rusks?" asked Aunt Janet. "There was no
baking-powder in the house, and I never could get them right with soda
and cream of tartar."

"There was plenty of baking-powder in the pantry," said Felicity.

"No, there wasn't a particle. I used the last making those cookies
Thursday morning."

"But I found another can nearly full, away back on the top shelf,
ma,--the one with the yellow label. I guess you forgot it was there."

Aunt Janet stared at her pretty daughter blankly. Then amazement gave
place to horror.

"Felicity King!" she exclaimed. "You don't mean to tell me that you
raised those rusks with the stuff that was in that old yellow can?"

"Yes, I did," faltered Felicity, beginning to look scared. "Why, ma,
what was the matter with it?"

"Matter! That stuff was TOOTH-POWDER, that's what it was. Your Cousin
Myra broke the bottle her tooth-powder was in when she was here last
winter and I gave her that old can to keep it in. She forgot to take it
when she went away and I put it on that top shelf. I declare you must
all have been bewitched yesterday."

Poor, poor Felicity! If she had not always been so horribly vain over
her cooking and so scornfully contemptuous of other people's aspirations
and mistakes along that line, I could have found it in my heart to pity
her.

The Story Girl would have been more than human if she had not betrayed a
little triumphant amusement, but Peter stood up for his lady manfully.

"The rusks were splendid, anyhow, so what difference does it make what
they were raised with?"

Dan, however, began to taunt Felicity with her tooth-powder rusks, and
kept it up for the rest of his natural life.

"Don't forget to send the Governor's wife the recipe for them," he said.

Felicity, with eyes tearful and cheeks crimson from mortification,
rushed from the room, but never, never did the Governor's wife get the
recipe for those rusks.




CHAPTER VII. WE VISIT COUSIN MATTIE'S


One Saturday in March we walked over to Baywater, for a long-talked-of
visit to Cousin Mattie Dilke. By the road, Baywater was six miles away,
but there was a short cut across hills and fields and woods which was
scantly three. We did not look forward to our visit with any particular
delight, for there was nobody at Cousin Mattie's except grown-ups who
had been grown up so long that it was rather hard for them to remember
they had ever been children. But, as Felicity told us, it was necessary
to visit Cousin Mattie at least once a year, or else she would be
"huffed," so we concluded we might as well go and have it over.

"Anyhow, we'll get a splendiferous dinner," said Dan. "Cousin Mattie's a
great cook and there's nothing stingy about her."

"You are always thinking of your stomach," said Felicity pleasantly.

"Well, you know I couldn't get along very well without it, darling,"
responded Dan who, since New Year's, had adopted a new method of dealing
with Felicity--whether by way of keeping his resolution or because he
had discovered that it annoyed Felicity far more than angry retorts,
deponent sayeth not. He invariably met her criticisms with a
good-natured grin and a flippant remark with some tender epithet tagged
on to it. Poor Felicity used to get hopelessly furious over it.

Uncle Alec was dubious about our going that day. He looked abroad on
the general dourness of gray earth and gray air and gray sky, and said
a storm was brewing. But Cousin Mattie had been sent word that we
were coming, and she did not like to be disappointed, so he let us go,
warning us to stay with Cousin Mattie all night if the storm came on
while we were there.

We enjoyed our walk--even Felix enjoyed it, although he had been
appointed to write up the visit for Our Magazine and was rather weighed
down by the responsibility of it. What mattered it though the world were
gray and wintry? We walked the golden road and carried spring time in
our hearts, and we beguiled our way with laughter and jest, and the
tales the Story Girl told us--myths and legends of elder time.

The walking was good, for there had lately been a thaw and everything
was frozen. We went over fields, crossed by spidery trails of gray
fences, where the withered grasses stuck forlornly up through the
snow; we lingered for a time in a group of hill pines, great, majestic
tree-creatures, friends of evening stars; and finally struck into the
belt of fir and maple which intervened between Carlisle and Baywater.
It was in this locality that Peg Bowen lived, and our way lay near her
house though not directly in sight of it. We hoped we would not meet
her, for since the affair of the bewitchment of Paddy we did not know
quite what to think of Peg; the boldest of us held his breath as we
passed her haunts, and drew it again with a sigh of relief when they
were safely left behind.

The woods were full of the brooding stillness that often precedes a
storm, and the wind crept along their white, cone-sprinkled floors with
a low, wailing cry. Around us were solitudes of snow, arcades picked out
in pearl and silver, long avenues of untrodden marble whence sprang the
cathedral columns of the firs. We were all sorry when we were through
the woods and found ourselves looking down into the snug, commonplace,
farmstead-dotted settlement of Baywater.

"There's Cousin Mattie's house--that big white one at the turn of the
road," said the Story Girl. "I hope she has that dinner ready, Dan. I'm
hungry as a wolf after our walk."

"I wish Cousin Mattie's husband was still alive," said Dan. "He was an
awful nice old man. He always had his pockets full of nuts and apples.
I used to like going there better when he was alive. Too many old women
don't suit me."

"Oh, Dan, Cousin Mattie and her sisters-in-law are just as nice and kind
as they can be," reproached Cecily.

"Oh, they're kind enough, but they never seem to see that a fellow gets
over being five years old if he only lives long enough," retorted Dan.

"I know a story about Cousin Mattie's husband," said the Story Girl.
"His name was Ebenezer, you know--"

"Is it any wonder he was thin and stunted looking?" said Dan.

"Ebenezer is just as nice a name as Daniel," said Felicity.

"Do you REALLY think so, my angel?" inquired Dan, in honey-sweet tones.

"Go on. Remember your second resolution," I whispered to the Story Girl,
who was stalking along with an outraged expression.

The Story Girl swallowed something and went on.

"Cousin Ebenezer had a horror of borrowing. He thought it was simply
a dreadful disgrace to borrow ANYTHING. Well, you know he and Cousin
Mattie used to live in Carlisle, where the Rays now live. This was when
Grandfather King was alive. One day Cousin Ebenezer came up the hill and
into the kitchen where all the family were. Uncle Roger said he looked
as if he had been stealing sheep. He sat for a whole hour in the kitchen
and hardly spoke a word, but just looked miserable. At last he got up
and said in a desperate sort of way, 'Uncle Abraham, can I speak with
you in private for a minute?' 'Oh, certainly,' said grandfather, and
took him into the parlour. Cousin Ebenezer shut the door, looked
all around him and then said imploringly, 'MORE PRIVATE STILL.' So
grandfather took him into the spare room and shut that door. He was
getting frightened. He thought something terrible must have happened
Cousin Ebenezer. Cousin Ebenezer came right up to grandfather, took
hold of the lapel of his coat, and said in a whisper, 'Uncle Abraham,
CAN--YOU--LEND--ME--AN--AXE?'"

"He needn't have made such a mystery about it," said Cecily, who had
missed the point entirely, and couldn't see why the rest of us were
laughing. But Cecily was such a darling that we did not mind her lack of
a sense of humour.

"It's kind of mean to tell stories like that about people who are dead,"
said Felicity.

"Sometimes it's safer than when they're alive though, sweetheart,"
commented Dan.

We had our expected good dinner at Cousin Mattie's--may it be counted
unto her for righteousness. She and her sisters-in-law, Miss Louisa
Jane and Miss Caroline, were very kind to us. We had quite a nice time,
although I understood why Dan objected to them when they patted us
all on the head and told us whom we resembled and gave us peppermint
lozenges.




CHAPTER VIII. WE VISIT PEG BOWEN


We left Cousin Mattie's early, for it still looked like a storm, though
no more so than it had in the morning. We intended to go home by a
different path--one leading through cleared land overgrown with scrub
maple, which had the advantage of being farther away from Peg Bowen's
house. We hoped to be home before it began to storm, but we had hardly
reached the hill above the village when a fine, driving snow began to
fall. It would have been wiser to have turned back even then; but we
had already come a mile and we thought we would have ample time to reach
home before it became really bad. We were sadly mistaken; by the time
we had gone another half-mile we were in the thick of a bewildering,
blinding snowstorm. But it was by now just as far back to Cousin
Mattie's as it was to Uncle Alec's, so we struggled on, growing more
frightened at every step. We could hardly face the stinging snow, and we
could not see ten feet ahead of us. It had turned bitterly cold and
the tempest howled all around us in white desolation under the
fast-darkening night. The narrow path we were trying to follow soon
became entirely obliterated and we stumbled blindly on, holding to each
other, and trying to peer through the furious whirl that filled the air.
Our plight had come upon us so suddenly that we could not realize it.
Presently Peter, who was leading the van because he was supposed to know
the path best, stopped.

"I can't see the road any longer," he shouted. "I don't know where we
are."

We all stopped and huddled together in a miserable group. Fear filled
our hearts. It seemed ages ago that we had been snug and safe and warm
at Cousin Mattie's. Cecily began to cry with cold. Dan, in spite of her
protests, dragged off his overcoat and made her put it on.

"We can't stay here," he said. "We'll all freeze to death if we do. Come
on--we've got to keep moving. The snow ain't so deep yet. Take hold of
my hand, Cecily. We must all hold together. Come, now."

"It won't be nice to be frozen to death, but if we get through alive
think what a story we'll have to tell," said the Story Girl between her
chattering teeth.

In my heart I did not believe we would ever get through alive. It was
almost pitch dark now, and the snow grew deeper every moment. We were
chilled to the heart. I thought how nice it would be to lie down and
rest; but I remembered hearing that that was fatal, and I endeavoured to
stumble on with the others. It was wonderful how the girls kept up, even
Cecily. It occurred to me to be thankful that Sara Ray was not with us.

But we were wholly lost now. All around us was a horror of great
darkness. Suddenly Felicity fell. We dragged her up, but she declared
she could not go on--she was done out.

"Have you any idea where we are?" shouted Dan to Peter.

"No," Peter shouted back, "the wind is blowing every which way. I
haven't any idea where home is."

Home! Would we ever see it again? We tried to urge Felicity on, but she
only repeated drowsily that she must lie down and rest. Cecily, too,
was reeling against me. The Story Girl still stood up staunchly and
counselled struggling on, but she was numb with cold and her words were
hardly distinguishable. Some wild idea was in my mind that we must dig a
hole in the snow and all creep into it. I had read somewhere that people
had thus saved their lives in snowstorms. Suddenly Felix gave a shout.

"I see a light," he cried.

"Where? Where?" We all looked but could see nothing.

"I don't see it now but I saw it a moment ago," shouted Felix. "I'm sure
I did. Come on--over in this direction."

Inspired with fresh hope we hurried after him. Soon we all saw the
light--and never shone a fairer beacon. A few more steps and, coming
into the shelter of the woodland on the further side, we realized where
we were.

"That's Peg Bowen's house," exclaimed Peter, stopping short in dismay.

"I don't care whose house it is," declared Dan. "We've got to go to it."

"I s'pose so," acquiesced Peter ruefully. "We can't freeze to death even
if she is a witch."

"For goodness' sake don't say anything about witches so close to her
house," gasped Felicity. "I'll be thankful to get in anywhere."

We reached the house, climbed the flight of steps that led to that
mysterious second story door, and Dan rapped. The door opened promptly
and Peg Bowen stood before us, in what seemed exactly the same costume
she had worn on the memorable day when we had come, bearing gifts, to
propitiate her in the matter of Paddy.

"Behind her was a dim room scantly illumined by the one small candle
that had guided us through the storm; but the old Waterloo stove was
colouring the gloom with tremulous, rose-red whorls of light, and warm
and cosy indeed seemed Peg's retreat to us snow-covered, frost-chilled,
benighted wanderers.

"Gracious goodness, where did yez all come from?" exclaimed Peg. "Did
they turn yez out?"

"We've been over to Baywater, and we got lost in the storm coming back,"
explained Dan. "We didn't know where we were till we saw your light.
I guess we'll have to stay here till the storm is over--if you don't
mind."

"And if it won't inconvenience you," said Cecily timidly.

"Oh, it's no inconvenience to speak of. Come in. Well, yez HAVE got some
snow on yez. Let me get a broom. You boys stomp your feet well and shake
your coats. You girls give me your things and I'll hang them up. Guess
yez are most froze. Well, sit up to the stove and git het up."

Peg bustled away to gather up a dubious assortment of chairs, with backs
and rungs missing, and in a few minutes we were in a circle around her
roaring stove, getting dried and thawed out. In our wildest flights
of fancy we had never pictured ourselves as guests at the witch's
hearth-stone. Yet here we were; and the witch herself was actually
brewing a jorum of ginger tea for Cecily, who continued to shiver long
after the rest of us were roasted to the marrow. Poor Sis drank that
scalding draught, being in too great awe of Peg to do aught else.

"That'll soon fix your shivers," said our hostess kindly. "And now I'll
get yez all some tea."

"Oh, please don't trouble," said the Story Girl hastily.

"'Tain't any trouble," said Peg briskly; then, with one of the sudden
changes to fierceness which made her such a terrifying personage, "Do
yez think my vittels ain't clean?"

"Oh, no, no," cried Felicity quickly, before the Story Girl could speak,
"none of us would ever think THAT. Sara only meant she didn't want you
to go to any bother on our account."

"It ain't any bother," said Peg, mollified. "I'm spry as a cricket this
winter, though I have the realagy sometimes. Many a good bite I've had
in your ma's kitchen. I owe yez a meal."

No more protests were made. We sat in awed silence, gazing with timid
curiosity about the room, the stained, plastered walls of which were
well-nigh covered with a motley assortment of pictures, chromos, and
advertisements, pasted on without much regard for order or character.

We had heard much of Peg's pets and now we saw them. Six cats occupied
various cosy corners; one of them, the black goblin which had so
terrified us in the summer, blinked satirically at us from the centre of
Peg's bed. Another, a dilapidated, striped beastie, with both ears and
one eye gone, glared at us from the sofa in the corner. A dog, with only
three legs, lay behind the stove; a crow sat on a roost above our
heads, in company with a matronly old hen; and on the clock shelf were
a stuffed monkey and a grinning skull. We had heard that a sailor had
given Peg the monkey. But where had she got the skull? And whose was it?
I could not help puzzling over these gruesome questions.

Presently tea was ready and we gathered around the festal board--a board
literally as well as figuratively, for Peg's table was the work of her
own unskilled hands. The less said about the viands of that meal, and
the dishes they were served in, the better. But we ate them--bless you,
yes!--as we would have eaten any witch's banquet set before us. Peg
might or might not be a witch--common sense said not; but we knew she
was quite capable of turning every one of us out of doors in one of
her sudden fierce fits if we offended her; and we had no mind to trust
ourselves again to that wild forest where we had fought a losing fight
with the demon forces of night and storm.

But it was not an agreeable meal in more ways than one. Peg was not
at all careful of anybody's feelings. She hurt Felix's cruelly as she
passed him his cup of tea.

"You've gone too much to flesh, boy. So the magic seed didn't work,
hey?"

How in the world had Peg found out about that magic seed? Felix looked
uncommonly foolish.

"If you'd come to me in the first place I'd soon have told you how to
get thin," said Peg, nodding wisely.

"Won't you tell me now?" asked Felix eagerly, his desire to melt his too
solid flesh overcoming his dread and shame.

"No, I don't like being second fiddle," answered Peg with a crafty
smile. "Sara, you're too scrawny and pale--not much like your ma. I knew
her well. She was counted a beauty, but she made no great things of a
match. Your father had some money but he was a tramp like meself. Where
is he now?"

"In Rome," said the Story Girl rather shortly.

"People thought your ma was crazy when she took him. But she'd a right
to please herself. Folks is too ready to call other folks crazy. There's
people who say I'M not in my right mind. Did yez ever"--Peg fixed
Felicity with a piercing glance--"hear anything so ridiculous?"

"Never," said Felicity, white to the lips.

"I wish everybody was as sane as I am," said Peg scornfully. Then she
looked poor Felicity over critically. "You're good-looking but proud.
And your complexion won't wear. It'll be like your ma's yet--too much
red in it."

"Well, that's better than being the colour of mud," muttered Peter, who
wasn't going to hear his lady traduced, even by a witch. All the thanks
he got was a furious look from Felicity, but Peg had not heard him and
now she turned her attention to Cecily.

"You look delicate. I daresay you'll never live to grow up."

Cecily's lip trembled and Dan's face turned crimson.

"Shut up," he said to Peg. "You've no business to say such things to
people."

I think my jaw dropped. I know Peter's and Felix's did. Felicity broke
in wildly.

"Oh, don't mind him, Miss Bowen. He's got SUCH a temper--that's just the
way he talks to us all at home. PLEASE excuse him."

"Bless you, I don't mind him," said Peg, from whom the unexpected seemed
to be the thing to expect. "I like a lad of spurrit. And so your father
run away, did he, Peter? He used to be a beau of mine--he seen me home
three times from singing school when we was young. Some folks said he
did it for a dare. There's such a lot of jealousy in the world, ain't
there? Do you know where he is now?"

"No," said Peter.

"Well, he's coming home before long," said Peg mysteriously.

"Who told you that?" cried Peter in amazement.

"Better not ask," responded Peg, looking up at the skull.

If she meant to make the flesh creep on our bones she succeeded. But
now, much to our relief, the meal was over and Peg invited us to draw
our chairs up to the stove again.

"Make yourselves at home," she said, producing her pipe from her pocket.
"I ain't one of the kind who thinks their houses too good to live in.
Guess I won't bother washing the dishes. They'll do yez for breakfast if
yez don't forget your places. I s'pose none of yez smokes."

"No," said Felicity, rather primly.

"Then yez don't know what's good for yez," retorted Peg, rather
grumpily. But a few whiffs of her pipe placated her and, observing
Cecily sigh, she asked her kindly what was the matter.

"I'm thinking how worried they'll be at home about us," explained
Cecily.

"Bless you, dearie, don't be worrying over that. I'll send them word
that yez are all snug and safe here."

"But how can you?" cried amazed Cecily.

"Better not ask," said Peg again, with another glance at the skull.

An uncomfortable silence followed, finally broken by Peg, who introduced
her pets to us and told how she had come by them. The black cat was her
favourite.

"That cat knows more than I do, if yez'll believe it," she said proudly.
"I've got a rat too, but he's a bit shy when strangers is round. Your
cat got all right again that time, didn't he?"

"Yes," said the Story Girl.

"Thought he would," said Peg, nodding sagely. "I seen to that. Now,
don't yez all be staring at the hole in my dress."

"We weren't," was our chorus of protest.

"Looked as if yez were. I tore that yesterday but I didn't mend it. I
was brought up to believe that a hole was an accident but a patch was a
disgrace. And so your Aunt Olivia is going to be married after all?"

This was news to us. We felt and looked dazed.

"I never heard anything of it," said the Story Girl.

"Oh, it's true enough. She's a great fool. I've no faith in husbands.
But one good thing is she ain't going to marry that Henry Jacobs of
Markdale. He wants her bad enough. Just like his presumption,--thinking
himself good enough for a King. His father is the worst man alive. He
chased me off his place with his dog once. But I'll get even with him
yet."

Peg looked very savage, and visions of burned barns floated through our
minds.

"He'll be punished in hell, you know," said Peter timidly.

"But I won't be there to see that," rejoined Peg. "Some folks say I'll
go there because I don't go to church oftener. But I don't believe it."

"Why don't you go?" asked Peter, with a temerity that bordered on
rashness.

"Well, I've got so sunburned I'm afraid folks might take me for an
Injun," explained Peg, quite seriously. "Besides, your minister makes
such awful long prayers. Why does he do it?"

"I suppose he finds it easier to talk to God than to people," suggested
Peter reflectively.

"Well, anyway, I belong to the round church," said Peg comfortably, "and
so the devil can't catch ME at the corners. I haven't been to Carlisle
church for over three years. I thought I'd a-died laughing the last time
I was there. Old Elder Marr took up the collection that day. He'd on a
pair of new boots and they squeaked all the way up and down the aisles.
And every time the boots squeaked the elder made a face, like he had
toothache. It was awful funny. How's your missionary quilt coming on,
Cecily?"

Was there anything Peg didn't know?

"Very well," said Cecily.

"You can put my name on it, if you want to."

"Oh, thank you. Which section--the five-cent one or the ten-cent one?"
asked Cecily timidly.

"The ten-cent one, of course. The best is none too good for me. I'll
give you the ten cents another time. I'm short of change just now--not
being as rich as Queen Victory. There's her picture up there--the one
with the blue sash and diamint crown and the lace curting on her head.
Can any of yez tell me this--is Queen Victory a married woman?"

"Oh, yes, but her husband is dead," answered the Story Girl.

"Well, I s'pose they couldn't have called her an old maid, seeing she
was a queen, even if she'd never got married. Sometimes I sez to myself,
'Peg, would you like to be Queen Victory?' But I never know what
to answer. In summer, when I can roam anywhere in the woods and the
sunshine--I wouldn't be Queen Victory for anything. But when it's winter
and cold and I can't git nowheres--I feel as if I wouldn't mind changing
places with her."

Peg put her pipe back in her mouth and began to smoke fiercely. The
candle wick burned long, and was topped by a little cap of fiery red
that seemed to wink at us like an impish gnome. The most grotesque
shadow of Peg flickered over the wall behind her. The one-eyed cat
remitted his grim watch and went to sleep. Outside the wind screamed
like a ravening beast at the window. Suddenly Peg removed her pipe from
her mouth, bent forward, gripped my wrist with her sinewy fingers until
I almost cried out with pain, and gazed straight into my face. I felt
horribly frightened of her. She seemed an entirely different creature. A
wild light was in her eyes, a furtive, animal-like expression was on
her face. When she spoke it was in a different voice and in different
language.

"Do you hear the wind?" she asked in a thrilling whisper. "What IS the
wind? What IS the wind?"

"I--I--don't know," I stammered.

"No more do I," said Peg, "and nobody knows. Nobody knows what the wind
is. I wish I could find out. I mightn't be so afraid of the wind if I
knew what it was. I am afraid of it. When the blasts come like that I
want to crouch down and hide me. But I can tell you one thing about the
wind--it's the only free thing in the world--THE--ONLY--FREE--THING.
Everything else is subject to some law, but the wind is FREE. It bloweth
where it listeth and no man can tame it. It's free--that's why I
love it, though I'm afraid of it. It's a grand thing to be free--free
free--free!"

Peg's voice rose almost to a shriek. We were dreadfully frightened, for
we knew there were times when she was quite crazy and we feared one of
her "spells" was coming on her. But with a swift movement she turned
the man's coat she wore up over her shoulders and head like a hood,
completely hiding her face. Then she crouched forward, elbows on knees,
and relapsed into silence. None of us dared speak or move. We sat thus
for half an hour. Then Peg jumped up and said briskly in her usual tone,

"Well, I guess yez are all sleepy and ready for bed. You girls can sleep
in my bed over there, and I'll take the sofy. Yez can put the cat off if
yez like, though he won't hurt yez. You boys can go downstairs. There's
a big pile of straw there that'll do yez for a bed, if yez put your
coats on. I'll light yez down, but I ain't going to leave yez a light
for fear yez'd set fire to the place."

Saying good-night to the girls, who looked as if they thought their last
hour was come, we went to the lower room. It was quite empty, save for a
pile of fire wood and another of clean straw. Casting a stealthy glance
around, ere Peg withdrew the light, I was relieved to see that there
were no skulls in sight. We four boys snuggled down in the straw. We did
not expect to sleep, but we were very tired and before we knew it our
eyes were shut, to open no more till morning. The poor girls were not
so fortunate. They always averred they never closed an eye. Four things
prevented them from sleeping. In the first place Peg snored loudly; in
the second place the fitful gleams of firelight kept flickering over the
skull for half the night and making gruesome effects on it; in the third
place Peg's pillows and bedclothes smelled rankly of tobacco smoke; and
in the fourth place they were afraid the rat Peg had spoken of might
come out to make their acquaintance. Indeed, they were sure they heard
him skirmishing about several times.

When we wakened in the morning the storm was over and a young morning
was looking through rosy eyelids across a white world. The little
clearing around Peg's cabin was heaped with dazzling drifts, and we
boys fell to and shovelled out a road to her well. She gave us
breakfast--stiff oatmeal porridge without milk, and a boiled egg apiece.
Cecily could NOT eat her porridge; she declared she had such a bad
cold that she had no appetite; a cold she certainly had; the rest of us
choked our messes down and after we had done so Peg asked us if we had
noticed a soapy taste.

"The soap fell into the porridge while I was making it," she said.
"But,"--smacking her lips,--"I'm going to make yez an Irish stew for
dinner. It'll be fine."

An Irish stew concocted by Peg! No wonder Dan said hastily,

"You are very kind but we'll have to go right home."

"Yez can't walk," said Peg.

"Oh, yes, we can. The drifts are so hard they'll carry, and the snow
will be pretty well blown off the middle of the fields. It's only
three-quarters of a mile. We boys will go home and get a pung and come
back for you girls."

But the girls wouldn't listen to this. They must go with us, even
Cecily.

"Seems to me yez weren't in such a hurry to leave last night," observed
Peg sarcastically.

"Oh, it's only because they'll be so anxious about us at home, and it's
Sunday and we don't want to miss Sunday School," explained Felicity.

"Well, I hope your Sunday School will do yez good," said Peg, rather
grumpily. But she relented again at the last and gave Cecily a wishbone.

"Whatever you wish on that will come true," she said. "But you only have
the one wish, so don't waste it."

"We're so much obliged to you for all your trouble," said the Story Girl
politely.

"Never mind the trouble. The expense is the thing," retorted Peg grimly.

"Oh!" Felicity hesitated. "If you would let us pay you--give you
something--"

"No, thank yez," responded Peg loftily. "There is people who take money
for their hospitality, I've heerd, but I'm thankful to say I don't
associate with that class. Yez are welcome to all yez have had here, if
yez ARE in a big hurry to get away."

She shut the door behind us with something of a slam, and her black
cat followed us so far, with stealthy, furtive footsteps, that we were
frightened of it. Eventually it turned back; then, and not till then,
did we feel free to discuss our adventure.

"Well, I'm thankful we're out of THAT," said Felicity, drawing a long
breath. "Hasn't it just been an awful experience?"

"We might all have been found frozen stark and stiff this morning,"
remarked the Story Girl with apparent relish.

"I tell you, it was a lucky thing we got to Peg Bowen's," said Dan.

"Miss Marwood says there is no such thing as luck," protested Cecily.
"We ought to say it was Providence instead."

"Well, Peg and Providence don't seem to go together very well, somehow,"
retorted Dan. "If Peg is a witch it must be the Other One she's in co.
with."

"Dan, it's getting to be simply scandalous the way you talk," said
Felicity. "I just wish ma could hear you."

"Is soap in porridge any worse than tooth-powder in rusks, lovely
creature?" asked Dan.

"Dan, Dan," admonished Cecily, between her coughs, "remember it's
Sunday."

"It seems hard to remember that," said Peter. "It doesn't seem a mite
like Sunday and it seems awful long since yesterday."

"Cecily, you've got a dreadful cold," said the Story Girl anxiously.

"In spite of Peg's ginger tea," added Felix.

"Oh, that ginger tea was AWFUL," exclaimed poor Cecily. "I thought I'd
never get it down--it was so hot with ginger--and there was so much of
it! But I was so frightened of offending Peg I'd have tried to drink it
all if there had been a bucketful. Oh, yes, it's very easy for you all
to laugh! You didn't have to drink it."

"We had to eat two meals, though," said Felicity with a shiver. "And I
don't know when those dishes of hers were washed. I just shut my eyes
and took gulps."

"Did you notice the soapy taste in the porridge?" asked the Story Girl.

"Oh, there were so many queer tastes about it I didn't notice one more
than another," answered Felicity wearily.

"What bothers me," remarked Peter absently, "is that skull. Do you
suppose Peg really finds things out by it?"

"Nonsense! How could she?" scoffed Felix, bold as a lion in daylight.

"She didn't SAY she did, you know," I said cautiously.

"Well, we'll know in time if the things she said were going to happen
do," mused Peter.

"Do you suppose your father is really coming home?" queried Felicity.

"I hope not," answered Peter decidedly.

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself," said Felicity severely.

"No, I oughtn't. Father got drunk all the time he was home, and wouldn't
work and was bad to mother," said Peter defiantly. "She had to support
him as well as herself and me. I don't want to see any father coming
home, and you'd better believe it. Of course, if he was the right sort
of a father it'd be different."

"What I would like to know is if Aunt Olivia is going to be married,"
said the Story Girl absently. "I can hardly believe it. But now that
I think of it--Uncle Roger has been teasing her ever since she was in
Halifax last summer."

"If she does get married you'll have to come and live with us," said
Cecily delightedly.

Felicity did not betray so much delight and the Story Girl remarked with
a weary little sigh that she hoped Aunt Olivia wouldn't. We all felt
rather weary, somehow. Peg's predictions had been unsettling, and our
nerves had all been more or less strained during our sojourn under her
roof. We were glad when we found ourselves at home.

The folks had not been at all troubled about us, but it was because they
were sure the storm had come up before we would think of leaving Cousin
Mattie's and not because they had received any mysterious message from
Peg's skull. We were relieved at this, but on the whole, our adventure
had not done much towards clearing up the vexed question of Peg's
witchcraft.




CHAPTER IX. EXTRACTS FROM THE FEBRUARY AND MARCH NUMBERS OF "OUR
MAGAZINE"


RESOLUTION HONOUR ROLL

Miss Felicity King.


HONOURABLE MENTION

Mr. Felix King. Mr. Peter Craig. Miss Sara Ray.


EDITORIAL

The editor wishes to make a few remarks about the Resolution Honour
Roll. As will be seen, only one name figures on it. Felicity says she
has thought a beautiful thought every morning before breakfast without
missing one morning, not even the one we were at Peg Bowen's. Some of
our number think it not fair that Felicity should be on the honour
roll (FELICITY, ASIDE: "That's Dan, of course.") when she only made one
resolution and won't tell us what any of the thoughts were. So we
have decided to give honourable mention to everybody who has kept one
resolution perfect. Felix has worked all his arithmetic problems by
himself. He complains that he never got more than a third of them
right and the teacher has marked him away down; but one cannot keep
resolutions without some inconvenience. Peter has never played tit-tat-x
in church or got drunk and says it wasn't as bad as he expected. (PETER,
INDIGNANTLY: "I never said it." CECILY, SOOTHINGLY: "Now, Peter, Bev
only meant that as a joke.") Sara Ray has never talked any mean gossip,
but does not find conversation as interesting as it used to be. (SARA
RAY, WONDERINGLY: "I don't remember of saying that.")

Felix did not eat any apples until March, but forgot and ate seven the
day we were at Cousin Mattie's. (FELIX: "I only ate five!") He soon gave
up trying to say what he thought always. He got into too much trouble.
We think Felix ought to change to old Grandfather King's rule. It was,
"Hold your tongue when you can, and when you can't tell the truth."
Cecily feels she has not read all the good books she might, because some
she tried to read were very dull and the Pansy books were so much more
interesting. And it is no use trying not to feel bad because her hair
isn't curly and she has marked that resolution out. The Story Girl came
very near to keeping her resolution to have all the good times possible,
but she says she missed two, if not three, she might have had. Dan
refuses to say anything about his resolutions and so does the editor.


PERSONALS

We regret that Miss Cecily King is suffering from a severe cold.

Mr. Alexander Marr of Markdale died very suddenly last week. We never
heard of his death till he was dead.

Miss Cecily King wishes to state that she did not ask the question about
"Holy Moses" and the other word in the January number. Dan put it in for
a mean joke.

The weather has been cold and fine. We have only had one bad storm. The
coasting on Uncle Roger's hill continues good.

Aunt Eliza did not favour us with a visit after all. She took cold and
had to go home. We were sorry that she had a cold but glad that she had
to go home. Cecily said she thought it wicked of us to be glad. But when
we asked her "cross her heart" if she wasn't glad herself she had to say
she was.

Miss Cecily King has got three very distinguished names on her quilt
square. They are the Governor and his wife and a witch's.

The King family had the honour of entertaining the Governor's wife to
tea on February the seventeenth. We are all invited to visit Government
House but some of us think we won't go.

A tragic event occurred last Tuesday. Mrs. James Frewen came to tea and
there was no pie in the house. Felicity has not yet fully recovered.

A new boy is coming to school. His name is Cyrus Brisk and his folks
moved up from Markdale. He says he is going to punch Willy Fraser's head
if Willy keeps on thinking he is Miss Cecily King's beau.

(CECILY: "I haven't ANY beau! I don't mean to think of such a thing for
at least eight years yet!")

Miss Alice Reade of Charlottetown Royalty has come to Carlisle to teach
music. She boards at Mr. Peter Armstrong's. The girls are all going to
take music lessons from her. Two descriptions of her will be found in
another column. Felix wrote one, but the girls thought he did not do her
justice, so Cecily wrote another one. She admits she copied most of the
description out of Valeria H. Montague's story Lord Marmaduke's First,
Last, and Only Love; or the Bride of the Castle by the Sea, but says
they fit Miss Reade better than anything she could make up.


HOUSEHOLD DEPARTMENT

Always keep the kitchen tidy and then you needn't mind if company comes
unexpectedly.

ANXIOUS INQUIRER: We don't know anything that will take the stain out
of a silk dress when a soft-boiled egg is dropped on it. Better not wear
your silk dress so often, especially when boiling eggs.

Ginger tea is good for colds.

OLD HOUSEKEEPER: Yes, when the baking-powder gives out you can use
tooth-powder instead.

(FELICITY: "I never wrote that! I don't care, I don't think it's fair
for other people to be putting things in my department!")

Our apples are not keeping well this year. They are rotting; and besides
father says we eat an awful lot of them.

PERSEVERANCE: I will give you the recipe for dumplings you ask for.
But remember it is not everyone who can make dumplings, even from the
recipe. There's a knack in it.

If the soap falls into the porridge do not tell your guests about it
until they have finished eating it because it might take away their
appetite.

                              FELICITY KING.


ETIQUETTE DEPARTMENT

P-r C-g:--Do not criticize people's noses unless you are sure they can't
hear you, and don't criticize your best girl's great-aunt's nose in any
case.

(FELICITY, TOSSING HER HEAD: "Oh, my! I s'pose Dan thought that was
extra smart.")

C-y K-g:--When my most intimate friend walks with another girl and
exchanges lace patterns with her, what ought I to do? Ans. Adopt a
dignified attitude.

F-y K-g:--It is better not to wear your second best hat to church, but
if your mother says you must it is not for me to question her decision.

(FELICITY: "Dan just copied that word for word out of the Family Guide,
except about the hat part.")

P-r C-g:--Yes, it would be quite proper to say good evening to the
family ghost if you met it.

F-x K-g:--No, it is not polite to sleep with your mouth open. What's
more, it isn't safe. Something might fall into it.

                                          DAN KING.


FASHION NOTES

Crocheted watch pockets are all the rage now. If you haven't a watch
they do to carry your pencil in or a piece of gum.

It is stylish to have hair ribbons to match your dress. But it is hard
to match gray drugget. I like scarlet for that.

It is stylish to pin a piece of ribbon on your coat the same colour as
your chum wears in her hair. Mary Martha Cowan saw them doing it in town
and started us doing it here. I always wear Kitty's ribbon and Kitty
wears mine, but the Story Girl thinks it is silly.

                                       CECILY KING.


AN ACCOUNT OF OUR VISIT TO COUSIN MATTIE'S

We all walked over to Cousin Mattie's last week. They were all well
there and we had a fine dinner. On our way back a snow-storm came up and
we got lost in the woods. We didn't know where we were or nothing. If we
hadn't seen a light I guess we'd all have been frozen and snowed over,
and they would never have found us till spring and that would be very
sad. But we saw a light and made for it and it was Peg Bowen's. Some
people think she is a witch and it's hard to tell, but she was real
hospitable and took us all in. Her house was very untidy but it was
warm. She has a skull. I mean a loose skull, not her own. She lets on it
tells her things, but Uncle Alec says it couldn't because it was only an
Indian skull that old Dr. Beecham had and Peg stole it when he died,
but Uncle Roger says he wouldn't trust himself with Peg's skull for
anything. She gave us supper. It was a horrid meal. The Story Girl says
I must not tell what I found in the bread and butter because it would
be too disgusting to read in Our Magazine but it don't matter because
we were all there, except Sara Ray, and know what it was. We stayed all
night and us boys slept in straw. None of us had ever slept on straw
before. We got home in the morning. That is all I can write about our
visit to Cousin Mattie's.

                                        FELIX KING.


MY WORST ADVENTURE

It's my turn to write it so I suppose I must. I guess my worst adventure
was two years ago when a whole lot of us were coasting on Uncle Rogers
hill. Charlie Cowan and Fred Marr had started, but half-way down their
sled got stuck and I run down to shove them off again. Then I stood
there just a moment to watch them with my back to the top of the hill.
While I was standing there Rob Marr started Kitty and Em Frewen off on
his sled. His sled had a wooden tongue in it and it slanted back over
the girls' heads. I was right in the way and they yelled to me to get
out, but just as I heard them it struck me. The sled took me between the
legs and I was histed back over the tongue and dropped in a heap behind
before I knew what had happened to me. I thought a tornado had struck
me. The girls couldn't stop though they thought I was killed, but Rob
came tearing down and helped me up. He was awful scared but I wasn't
killed nor my back wasn't broken but my nose bled something awful and
kept on bleeding for three days. Not all the time but by spells.

                                          DAN KING.


THE STORY OF HOW CARLISLE GOT ITS NAME

This is a true story to. Long ago there was a girl lived in charlotte
town. I dont know her name so I cant right it and maybe it is just as
well for Felicity might think it wasnt romantik like Miss Jemima Parrs.
She was awful pretty and a young englishman who had come out to make his
fortune fell in love with her and they were engaged to be married the
next spring. His name was Mr. Carlisle. In the winter he started off to
hunt cariboo for a spell. Cariboos lived on the island then. There aint
any here now. He got to where it is Carlisle now. It wasn't anything
then only woods and a few indians. He got awful sick and was sick for
ever so long in a indian camp and only an old micmac squaw to wait on
him. Back in town they all thought he was dead and his girl felt bad for
a little while and then got over it and took up with another beau. The
girls say that wasnt romantik but I think it was sensible but if it had
been me that died I'd have felt bad if she forgot me so soon. But he
hadnt died and when he got back to town he went right to her house
and walked in and there she was standing up to be married to the other
fellow. Poor Mr. Carlisle felt awful. He was sick and week and it went
to his head. He just turned and run and run till he got back to the old
micmac's camp and fell in front of it. But the indians had gone because
it was spring and it didnt matter because he really was dead this time
and people come looking for him from town and found him and buryed him
there and called the place after him. They say the girl was never happy
again and that was hard lines on her but maybe she deserved it.

                                       PETER CRAIG.


MISS ALICE READE

Miss Alice Reade is a very pretty girl. She has kind of curly blackish
hair and big gray eyes and a pale face. She is tall and thin but her
figure is pretty fair and she has a nice mouth and a sweet way of
speaking. The girls are crazy about her and talk about her all the time.

                                        FELIX KING.


BEAUTIFUL ALICE

That is what we girls call Miss Reade among ourselves. She is divinely
beautiful. Her magnificent wealth of raven hair flows back in glistening
waves from her sun-kissed brow. (DAN: "If Felix had said she was
sunburned you'd have all jumped on him." (CECILY, COLDLY: "Sun-kissed
doesn't mean sunburned." DAN: "What does it mean then?" CECILY,
EMBARRASSED: "I--I don't know. But Miss Montague says the Lady
Geraldine's brow was sun-kissed and of course an earl's daughter
wouldn't be sunburned. "THE STORY GIRL: "Oh, don't interrupt the reading
like this. It spoils it.") Her eyes are gloriously dark and deep, like
midnight lakes mirroring the stars of heaven. Her features are like
sculptured marble and her mouth is a trembling, curving Cupid's bow.
(PETER, ASIDE: "What kind of a thing is that?") Her creamy skin is as
fair and flawless as the petals of a white lily. Her voice is like the
ripple of a woodland brook and her slender form is matchless in its
symmetry. (DAN: "That's Valeria's way of putting it, but Uncle Roger
says she don't show her feed much." FELICITY: "Dan! if Uncle Roger is
vulgar you needn't be!") Her hands are like a poet's dreams. She dresses
so nicely and looks so stylish in her clothes. Her favourite colour is
blue. Some people think she is stiff and some say she is stuck-up, but
she isn't a bit. It's just that she is different from them and they
don't like it. She is just lovely and we adore her.)

                                       CECILY KING.




CHAPTER X. DISAPPEARANCE OF PADDY


As I remember, the spring came late that year in Carlisle. It was May
before the weather began to satisfy the grown-ups. But we children were
more easily pleased, and we thought April a splendid month because the
snow all went early and left gray, firm, frozen ground for our rambles
and games. As the days slipped by they grew more gracious; the hillsides
began to look as if they were thinking of mayflowers; the old orchard
was washed in a bath of tingling sunshine and the sap stirred in the
big trees; by day the sky was veiled with delicate cloud drift, fine and
filmy as woven mist; in the evenings a full, low moon looked over the
valleys, as pallid and holy as some aureoled saint; a sound of laughter
and dream was on the wind and the world grew young with the mirth of
April breezes.

"It's so nice to be alive in the spring," said the Story Girl one
twilight as we swung on the boughs of Uncle Stephen's walk.

"It's nice to be alive any time," said Felicity, complacently.

"But it's nicer in the spring," insisted the Story Girl. "When I'm dead
I think I'll FEEL dead all the rest of the year, but when spring comes
I'm sure I'll feel like getting up and being alive again."

"You do say such queer things," complained Felicity. "You won't be
really dead any time. You'll be in the next world. And I think it's
horrid to talk about people being dead anyhow."

"We've all got to die," said Sara Ray solemnly, but with a certain
relish. It was as if she enjoyed looking forward to something in which
nothing, neither an unsympathetic mother, nor the cruel fate which had
made her a colourless little nonentity, could prevent her from being the
chief performer.

"I sometimes think," said Cecily, rather wearily, "that it isn't so
dreadful to die young as I used to suppose."

She prefaced her remark with a slight cough, as she had been all too apt
to do of late, for the remnants of the cold she had caught the night we
were lost in the storm still clung to her.

"Don't talk such nonsense, Cecily," cried the Story Girl with unwonted
sharpness, a sharpness we all understood. All of us, in our hearts,
though we never spoke of it to each other, thought Cecily was not as
well as she ought to be that spring, and we hated to hear anything said
which seemed in any way to touch or acknowledge the tiny, faint shadow
which now and again showed itself dimly athwart our sunshine.

"Well, it was you began talking of being dead," said Felicity angrily.
"I don't think it's right to talk of such things. Cecily, are you sure
your feet ain't damp? We ought to go in anyhow--it's too chilly out here
for you."

"You girls had better go," said Dan, "but I ain't going in till old
Isaac Frewen goes. I've no use for him."

"I hate him, too," said Felicity, agreeing with Dan for once in her
life. "He chews tobacco all the time and spits on the floor--the horrid
pig!"

"And yet his brother is an elder in the church," said Sara Ray
wonderingly.

"I know a story about Isaac Frewen," said the Story Girl. "When he was
young he went by the name of Oatmeal Frewen and he got it this way. He
was noted for doing outlandish things. He lived at Markdale then and he
was a great, overgrown, awkward fellow, six feet tall. He drove over to
Baywater one Saturday to visit his uncle there and came home the next
afternoon, and although it was Sunday he brought a big bag of oatmeal in
the wagon with him. When he came to Carlisle church he saw that service
was going on there, and he concluded to stop and go in. But he didn't
like to leave his oatmeal outside for fear something would happen to it,
because there were always mischievous boys around, so he hoisted the bag
on his back and walked into church with it and right to the top of the
aisle to Grandfather King's pew. Grandfather King used to say he
would never forget it to his dying day. The minister was preaching and
everything was quiet and solemn when he heard a snicker behind him.
Grandfather King turned around with a terrible frown--for you know in
those days it was thought a dreadful thing to laugh in church--to rebuke
the offender; and what did he see but that great, hulking young Isaac
stalking up the aisle, bending a little forward under the weight of a
big bag of oatmeal? Grandfather King was so amazed he couldn't laugh,
but almost everyone else in the church was laughing, and grandfather
said he never blamed them, for no funnier sight was ever seen. Young
Isaac turned into grandfather's pew and thumped the bag of oatmeal down
on the seat with a thud that cracked it. Then he plumped down beside
it, took off his hat, wiped his face, and settled back to listen to the
sermon, just as if it was all a matter of course. When the service was
over he hoisted his bag up again, marched out of church, and drove home.
He could never understand why it made so much talk; but he was known by
the name of Oatmeal Frewen for years."

Our laughter, as we separated, rang sweetly through the old orchard and
across the far, dim meadows. Felicity and Cecily went into the house
and Sara Ray and the Story Girl went home, but Peter decoyed me into the
granary to ask advice.

"You know Felicity has a birthday next week," he said, "and I want to
write her an ode."

"A--a what?" I gasped.

"An ode," repeated Peter, gravely. "It's poetry, you know. I'll put it
in Our Magazine."

"But you can't write poetry, Peter," I protested.

"I'm going to try," said Peter stoutly. "That is, if you think she won't
be offended at me."

"She ought to feel flattered," I replied.

"You never can tell how she'll take things," said Peter gloomily. "Of
course I ain't going to sign my name, and if she ain't pleased I won't
tell her I wrote it. Don't you let on."

I promised I wouldn't and Peter went off with a light heart. He said he
meant to write two lines every day till he got it done.

Cupid was playing his world-old tricks with others than poor Peter that
spring. Allusion has been made in these chronicles to one, Cyrus Brisk,
and to the fact that our brown-haired, soft-voiced Cecily had found
favour in the eyes of the said Cyrus. Cecily did not regard her conquest
with any pride. On the contrary, it annoyed her terribly to be teased
about Cyrus. She declared she hated both him and his name. She was as
uncivil to him as sweet Cecily could be to anyone, but the gallant Cyrus
was nothing daunted. He laid determined siege to Cecily's young heart by
all the methods known to love-lorn swains. He placed delicate tributes
of spruce gum, molasses taffy, "conversation" candies and decorated
slate pencils on her desk; he persistently "chose" her in all school
games calling for a partner; he entreated to be allowed to carry her
basket from school; he offered to work her sums for her; and rumour had
it that he had made a wild statement to the effect that he meant to
ask if he might see her home some night from prayer meeting. Cecily was
quite frightened that he would; she confided to me that she would rather
die than walk home with him, but that if he asked her she would be too
bashful to say no. So far, however, Cyrus had not molested her out of
school, nor had he as yet thumped Willy Fraser--who was reported to be
very low in his spirits over the whole affair.

And now Cyrus had written Cecily a letter--a love letter, mark you.
Moreover, he had sent it through the post-office, with a real stamp
on it. Its arrival made a sensation among us. Dan brought it from the
office and, recognizing the handwriting of Cyrus, gave Cecily no peace
until she showed us the letter. It was a very sentimental and rather
ill-spelled epistle in which the inflammable Cyrus reproached her in
heart-rending words for her coldness, and begged her to answer his
letter, saying that if she did he would keep the secret "in violets."
Cyrus probably meant "inviolate" but Cecily thought it was intended for
a poetical touch. He signed himself "your troo lover, Cyrus Brisk" and
added in a postcript that he couldn't eat or sleep for thinking of her.

"Are you going to answer it?" asked Dan.

"Certainly not," said Cecily with dignity.

"Cyrus Brisk wants to be kicked," growled Felix, who never seemed to be
any particular friend of Willy Fraser's either. "He'd better learn how
to spell before he takes to writing love letters."

"Maybe Cyrus will starve to death if you don't," suggested Sara Ray.

"I hope he will," said Cecily cruelly. She was truly vexed over the
letter; and yet, so contradictory a thing is the feminine heart, even at
twelve years old, I think she was a little flattered by it also. It was
her first love letter and she confided to me that it gives you a very
queer feeling to get it. At all events--the letter, though unanswered,
was not torn up. I feel sure Cecily preserved it. But she walked past
Cyrus next morning at school with a frozen countenance, evincing not the
slightest pity for his pangs of unrequited affection. Cecily winced when
Pat caught a mouse, visited a school chum the day the pigs were killed
that she might not hear their squealing, and would not have stepped on a
caterpillar for anything; yet she did not care at all how much she made
the brisk Cyrus suffer.

Then, suddenly, all our spring gladness and Maytime hopes were blighted
as by a killing frost. Sorrow and anxiety pervaded our days and
embittered our dreams by night. Grim tragedy held sway in our lives for
the next fortnight.

Paddy disappeared. One night he lapped his new milk as usual at Uncle
Roger's dairy door and then sat blandly on the flat stone before it,
giving the world assurance of a cat, sleek sides glistening, plumy tail
gracefully folded around his paws, brilliant eyes watching the stir and
flicker of bare willow boughs in the twilight air above him. That was
the last seen of him. In the morning he was not.

At first we were not seriously alarmed. Paddy was no roving Thomas,
but occasionally he vanished for a day or so. But when two days passed
without his return we became anxious, the third day worried us greatly,
and the fourth found us distracted.

"Something has happened to Pat," the Story Girl declared miserably. "He
never stayed away from home more than two days in his life."

"What could have happened to him?" asked Felix.

"He's been poisoned--or a dog has killed him," answered the Story Girl
in tragic tones.

Cecily began to cry at this; but tears were of no avail. Neither was
anything else, apparently. We searched every nook and cranny of barns
and out-buildings and woods on both the King farms; we inquired far and
wide; we roved over Carlisle meadows calling Paddy's name, until Aunt
Janet grew exasperated and declared we must stop making such exhibitions
of ourselves. But we found and heard no trace of our lost pet. The Story
Girl moped and refused to be comforted; Cecily declared she could not
sleep at night for thinking of poor Paddy dying miserably in some corner
to which he had dragged his failing body, or lying somewhere mangled and
torn by a dog. We hated every dog we saw on the ground that he might be
the guilty one.

"It's the suspense that's so hard," sobbed the Story Girl. "If I just
knew what had happened to him it wouldn't be QUITE so hard. But I don't
know whether he's dead or alive. He may be living and suffering, and
every night I dream that he has come home and when I wake up and find
it's only a dream it just breaks my heart."

"It's ever so much worse than when he was so sick last fall," said
Cecily drearily. "Then we knew that everything was done for him that
could be done."

We could not appeal to Peg Bowen this time. In our desperation we would
have done it, but Peg was far away. With the first breath of spring she
was up and off, answering to the lure of the long road. She had not
been seen in her accustomed haunts for many a day. Her pets were gaining
their own living in the woods and her house was locked up.




CHAPTER XI. THE WITCH'S WISHBONE


When a fortnight had elapsed we gave up all hope.

"Pat is dead," said the Story Girl hopelessly, as we returned one
evening from a bootless quest to Andrew Cowan's where a strange gray
cat had been reported--a cat which turned out to be a yellowish brown
nondescript, with no tail to speak of.

"I'm afraid so," I acknowledged at last.

"If only Peg Bowen had been at home she could have found him for us,"
asserted Peter. "Her skull would have told her where he was."

"I wonder if the wishbone she gave me would have done any good," cried
Cecily suddenly. "I'd forgotten all about it. Oh, do you suppose it's
too late yet?"

"There's nothing in a wishbone," said Dan impatiently.

"You can't be sure. She TOLD me I'd get the wish I made on it. I'm going
to try whenever I get home."

"It can't do any harm, anyhow," said Peter, "but I'm afraid you've left
it too late. If Pat is dead even a witch's wishbone can't bring him back
to life."

"I'll never forgive myself for not thinking about it before," mourned
Cecily.

As soon as we got home she flew to the little box upstairs where she
kept her treasures, and brought therefrom the dry and brittle wishbone.

"Peg told me how it must be done. I'm to hold the wishbone with both
hands, like this, and walk backward, repeating the wish nine times. And
when I've finished the ninth time I'm to turn around nine times, from
right to left, and then the wish will come true right away."

"Do you expect to see Pat when you finish turning?" said Dan
skeptically.

None of us had any faith in the incantation except Peter, and, by
infection, Cecily. You never could tell what might happen. Cecily
took the wishbone in her trembling little hands and began her backward
pacing, repeating solemnly, "I wish that we may find Paddy alive, or
else his body, so that we can bury him decently." By the time Cecily
had repeated this nine times we were all slightly infected with the
desperate hope that something might come of it; and when she had
made her nine gyrations we looked eagerly down the sunset lane, half
expecting to see our lost pet. But we saw only the Awkward Man turning
in at the gate. This was almost as surprising as the sight of Pat
himself would have been; but there was no sign of Pat and hope flickered
out in every breast but Peter's.

"You've got to give the spell time to work," he expostulated. "If Pat
was miles away when it was wished it wouldn't be reasonable to expect to
see him right off."

But we of little faith had already lost that little, and it was a very
disconsolate group which the Awkward Man presently joined.

He was smiling--his rare, beautiful smile which only children ever
saw--and he lifted his hat to the girls with no trace of the shyness and
awkwardness for which he was notorious.

"Good evening," he said. "Have you little people lost a cat lately?"

We stared. Peter said "I knew it!" in a triumphant pig's whisper. The
Story Girl started eagerly forward.

"Oh, Mr. Dale, can you tell us anything of Paddy?" she cried.

"A silver gray cat with black points and very fine marking?"

"Yes, yes!"

"Alive?"

"Yes."

"Well, doesn't that beat the Dutch!" muttered Dan.

But we were all crowding about the Awkward Man, demanding where and when
he had found Paddy.

"You'd better come over to my place and make sure that it really is your
cat," suggested the Awkward Man, "and I'll tell you all about finding
him on the way. I must warn you that he is pretty thin--but I think
he'll pull through."

We obtained permission to go without much difficulty, although the
spring evening was wearing late, for Aunt Janet said she supposed none
of us would sleep a wink that night if we didn't. A joyful procession
followed the Awkward Man and the Story Girl across the gray, star-litten
meadows to his home and through his pine-guarded gate.

"You know that old barn of mine back in the woods?" said the Awkward
Man. "I go to it only about once in a blue moon. There was an old barrel
there, upside down, one side resting on a block of wood. This morning
I went to the barn to see about having some hay hauled home, and I had
occasion to move the barrel. I noticed that it seemed to have been
moved slightly since my last visit, and it was now resting wholly on the
floor. I lifted it up--and there was a cat lying on the floor under it.
I had heard you had lost yours and I took it this was your pet. I was
afraid he was dead at first. He was lying there with his eyes closed;
but when I bent over him he opened them and gave a pitiful little mew;
or rather his mouth made the motion of a mew, for he was too weak to
utter a sound."

"Oh, poor, poor Paddy," said tender-hearted Cecily tearfully.

"He couldn't stand, so I carried him home and gave him just a little
milk. Fortunately he was able to lap it. I gave him a little more at
intervals all day, and when I left he was able to crawl around. I think
he'll be all right, but you'll have to be careful how you feed him for a
few days. Don't let your hearts run away with your judgment and kill him
with kindness."

"Do you suppose any one put him under that barrel?" asked the Story
Girl.

"No. The barn was locked. Nothing but a cat could get in. I suppose
he went under the barrel, perhaps in pursuit of a mouse, and somehow
knocked it off the block and so imprisoned himself."

Paddy was sitting before the fire in the Awkward Man's clean, bare
kitchen. Thin! Why, he was literally skin and bone, and his fur was dull
and lustreless. It almost broke our hearts to see our beautiful Paddy
brought so low.

"Oh, how he must have suffered!" moaned Cecily.

"He'll be as prosperous as ever in a week or two," said the Awkward Man
kindly.

The Story Girl gathered Paddy up in her arms. Most mellifluously did he
purr as we crowded around to stroke him; with friendly joy he licked our
hands with his little red tongue; poor Paddy was a thankful cat; he was
no longer lost, starving, imprisoned, helpless; he was with his comrades
once more and he was going home--home to his old familiar haunts of
orchard and dairy and granary, to his daily rations of new milk and
cream, to the cosy corner of his own fireside. We trooped home joyfully,
the Story Girl in our midst carrying Paddy hugged against her shoulder.
Never did April stars look down on a happier band of travellers on the
golden road. There was a little gray wind out in the meadows that
night, and it danced along beside us on viewless, fairy feet, and sang
a delicate song of the lovely, waiting years, while the night laid her
beautiful hands of blessing over the world.

"You see what Peg's wishbone did," said Peter triumphantly.

"Now, look here, Peter, don't talk nonsense," expostulated Dan. "The
Awkward Man found Paddy this morning and had started to bring us word
before Cecily ever thought of the wishbone. Do you mean to say you
believe he wouldn't have come walking up our lane just when he did if
she had never thought of it?"

"I mean to say that I wouldn't mind if I had several wishbones of the
same kind," retorted Peter stubbornly.

"Of course I don't think the wishbone had really anything to do with
our getting Paddy back, but I'm glad I tried it, for all that," remarked
Cecily in a tone of satisfaction.

"Well, anyhow, we've got Pat and that's the main thing," said Felix.

"And I hope it will be a lesson to him to stay home after this,"
commented Felicity.

"They say the barrens are full of mayflowers," said the Story Girl. "Let
us have a mayflower picnic tomorrow to celebrate Paddy's safe return."




CHAPTER XII. FLOWERS O' MAY


Accordingly we went a-maying, following the lure of dancing winds to a
certain westward sloping hill lying under the spirit-like blue of spring
skies, feathered over with lisping young pines and firs, which cupped
little hollows and corners where the sunshine got in and never got out
again, but stayed there and grew mellow, coaxing dear things to bloom
long before they would dream of waking up elsewhere.

'Twas there we found our mayflowers, after faithful seeking. Mayflowers,
you must know, never flaunt themselves; they must be sought as
becomes them, and then they will yield up their treasures to the
seeker--clusters of star-white and dawn-pink that have in them the very
soul of all the springs that ever were, re-incarnated in something it
seems gross to call perfume, so exquisite and spiritual is it.

We wandered gaily over the hill, calling to each other with laughter
and jest, getting parted and delightfully lost in that little pathless
wilderness, and finding each other unexpectedly in nooks and dips and
sunny silences, where the wind purred and gentled and went softly. When
the sun began to hang low, sending great fan-like streamers of radiance
up to the zenith, we foregathered in a tiny, sequestered valley, full
of young green fern, lying in the shadow of a wooded hill. In it was a
shallow pool--a glimmering green sheet of water on whose banks nymphs
might dance as blithely as ever they did on Argive hill or in Cretan
dale. There we sat and stripped the faded leaves and stems from our
spoil, making up the blossoms into bouquets to fill our baskets with
sweetness. The Story Girl twisted a spray of divinest pink in her brown
curls, and told us an old legend of a beautiful Indian maiden who died
of a broken heart when the first snows of winter were falling, because
she believed her long-absent lover was false. But he came back in the
spring time from his long captivity; and when he heard that she was dead
he sought her grave to mourn her, and lo, under the dead leaves of the
old year he found sweet sprays of a blossom never seen before, and
knew that it was a message of love and remembrance from his dark-eyed
sweet-heart.

"Except in stories Indian girls are called squaws," remarked practical
Dan, tying his mayflowers together in one huge, solid, cabbage-like
bunch. Not for Dan the bother of filling his basket with the loose
sprays, mingled with feathery elephant's-ears and trails of creeping
spruce, as the rest of us, following the Story Girl's example, did. Nor
would he admit that ours looked any better than his.

"I like things of one kind together. I don't like them mixed," he said.

"You have no taste," said Felicity.

"Except in my mouth, best beloved," responded Dan.

"You do think you are so smart," retorted Felicity, flushing with anger.

"Don't quarrel this lovely day," implored Cecily.

"Nobody's quarrelling, Sis. I ain't a bit mad. It's Felicity. What on
earth is that at the bottom of your basket, Cecily?"

"It's a History of the Reformation in France," confessed poor Cecily,
"by a man named D-a-u-b-i-g-n-y. I can't pronounce it. I heard Mr.
Marwood saying it was a book everyone ought to read, so I began it
last Sunday. I brought it along today to read when I got tired picking
flowers. I'd ever so much rather have brought Ester Reid. There's so
much in the history I can't understand, and it is so dreadful to read of
people being burned to death. But I felt I OUGHT to read it."

"Do you really think your mind has improved any?" asked Sara Ray
seriously, wreathing the handle of her basket with creeping spruce.

"No, I'm afraid it hasn't one bit," answered Cecily sadly. "I feel that
I haven't succeeded very well in keeping my resolutions."

"I've kept mine," said Felicity complacently.

"It's easy to keep just one," retorted Cecily, rather resentfully.

"It's not so easy to think beautiful thoughts," answered Felicity.

"It's the easiest thing in the world," said the Story Girl, tiptoeing to
the edge of the pool to peep at her own arch reflection, as some nymph
left over from the golden age might do. "Beautiful thoughts just crowd
into your mind at times."

"Oh, yes, AT TIMES. But that's different from thinking one REGULARLY at
a given hour. And mother is always calling up the stairs for me to hurry
up and get dressed, and it's VERY hard sometimes."

"That's so," conceded the Story Girl. "There ARE times when I can't
think anything but gray thoughts. Then, other days, I think pink and
blue and gold and purple and rainbow thoughts all the time."

"The idea! As if thoughts were coloured," giggled Felicity.

"Oh, they are!" cried the Story Girl. "Why, I can always SEE the colour
of any thought I think. Can't you?"

"I never heard of such a thing," declared Felicity, "and I don't believe
it. I believe you are just making that up."

"Indeed I'm not. Why, I always supposed everyone thought in colours. It
must be very tiresome if you don't."

"When you think of me what colour is it?" asked Peter curiously.

"Yellow," answered the Story Girl promptly. "And Cecily is a sweet pink,
like those mayflowers, and Sara Ray is very pale blue, and Dan is red
and Felix is yellow, like Peter, and Bev is striped."

"What colour am I?" asked Felicity, amid the laughter at my expense.

"You're--you're like a rainbow," answered the Story Girl rather
reluctantly. She had to be honest, but she would rather not have
complimented Felicity. "And you needn't laugh at Bev. His stripes are
beautiful. It isn't HE that is striped. It's just the THOUGHT of him.
Peg Bowen is a queer sort of yellowish green and the Awkward Man is
lilac. Aunt Olivia is pansy-purple mixed with gold, and Uncle Roger is
navy blue."

"I never heard such nonsense," declared Felicity. The rest of us were
rather inclined to agree with her for once. We thought the Story Girl
was making fun of us. But I believe she really had a strange gift of
thinking in colours. In later years, when we were grown up, she told
me of it again. She said that everything had colour in her thought; the
months of the year ran through all the tints of the spectrum, the days
of the week were arrayed as Solomon in his glory, morning was golden,
noon orange, evening crystal blue, and night violet. Every idea came to
her mind robed in its own especial hue. Perhaps that was why her voice
and words had such a charm, conveying to the listeners' perception such
fine shadings of meaning and tint and music.

"Well, let's go and have something to eat," suggested Dan. "What colour
is eating, Sara?"

"Golden brown, just the colour of a molasses cooky," laughed the Story
Girl.

We sat on the ferny bank of the pool and ate of the generous basket Aunt
Janet had provided, with appetites sharpened by the keen spring air and
our wilderness rovings. Felicity had made some very nice sandwiches of
ham which we all appreciated except Dan, who declared he didn't like
things minced up and dug out of the basket a chunk of boiled pork which
he proceeded to saw up with a jack-knife and devour with gusto.

"I told ma to put this in for me. There's some CHEW to it," he said.

"You are not a bit refined," commented Felicity.

"Not a morsel, my love," grinned Dan.

"You make me think of a story I heard Uncle Roger telling about Cousin
Annetta King," said the Story Girl. "Great-uncle Jeremiah King used to
live where Uncle Roger lives now, when Grandfather King was alive and
Uncle Roger was a boy. In those days it was thought rather coarse for a
young lady to have too hearty an appetite, and she was more admired if
she was delicate about what she ate. Cousin Annetta set out to be very
refined indeed. She pretended to have no appetite at all. One afternoon
she was invited to tea at Grandfather King's when they had some special
company--people from Charlottetown. Cousin Annetta said she could hardly
eat anything. 'You know, Uncle Abraham,' she said, in a very affected,
fine-young-lady voice, 'I really hardly eat enough to keep a bird alive.
Mother says she wonders how I continue to exist.' And she picked and
pecked until Grandfather King declared he would like to throw something
at her. After tea Cousin Annetta went home, and just about dark
Grandfather King went over to Uncle Jeremiah's on an errand. As he
passed the open, lighted pantry window he happened to glance in, and
what do you think he saw? Delicate Cousin Annetta standing at the
dresser, with a big loaf of bread beside her and a big platterful of
cold, boiled pork in front of her; and Annetta was hacking off great
chunks, like Dan there, and gobbling them down as if she was starving.
Grandfather King couldn't resist the temptation. He stepped up to the
window and said, 'I'm glad your appetite has come back to you, Annetta.
Your mother needn't worry about your continuing to exist as long as you
can tuck away fat, salt pork in that fashion.'

"Cousin Annetta never forgave him, but she never pretended to be
delicate again."

"The Jews don't believe in eating pork," said Peter.

"I'm glad I'm not a Jew and I guess Cousin Annetta was too," said Dan.

"I like bacon, but I can never look at a pig without wondering if they
were ever intended to be eaten," remarked Cecily naively.

When we finished our lunch the barrens were already wrapping themselves
in a dim, blue dusk and falling upon rest in dell and dingle. But out
in the open there was still much light of a fine emerald-golden sort and
the robins whistled us home in it. "Horns of Elfland" never sounded more
sweetly around hoary castle and ruined fane than those vesper calls
of the robins from the twilight spruce woods and across green pastures
lying under the pale radiance of a young moon.

When we reached home we found that Miss Reade had been up to the hill
farm on an errand and was just leaving. The Story Girl went for a walk
with her and came back with an important expression on her face.

"You look as if you had a story to tell," said Felix.

"One is growing. It isn't a whole story yet," answered the Story Girl
mysteriously.

"What is it?" asked Cecily.

"I can't tell you till it's fully grown," said the Story Girl. "But
I'll tell you a pretty little story the Awkward Man told us--told
me--tonight. He was walking in his garden as we went by, looking at his
tulip beds. His tulips are up ever so much higher than ours, and I asked
him how he managed to coax them along so early. And he said HE didn't do
it--it was all the work of the pixies who lived in the woods across
the brook. There were more pixy babies than usual this spring, and the
mothers were in a hurry for the cradles. The tulips are the pixy babies'
cradles, it seems. The mother pixies come out of the woods at twilight
and rock their tiny little brown babies to sleep in the tulip cups. That
is the reason why tulip blooms last so much longer than other blossoms.
The pixy babies must have a cradle until they are grown up. They grow
very fast, you see, and the Awkward Man says on a spring evening, when
the tulips are out, you can hear the sweetest, softest, clearest, fairy
music in his garden, and it is the pixy folk singing as they rock the
pixy babies to sleep."

"Then the Awkward Man says what isn't true," said Felicity severely.




CHAPTER XIII. A SURPRISING ANNOUNCEMENT


"Nothing exciting has happened for ever so long," said the Story Girl
discontentedly, one late May evening, as we lingered under the wonderful
white bloom of the cherry trees. There was a long row of them in the
orchard, with a Lombardy poplar at either end, and a hedge of lilacs
behind. When the wind blew over them all the spicy breezes of Ceylon's
isle were never sweeter.

It was a time of wonder and marvel, of the soft touch of silver rain on
greening fields, of the incredible delicacy of young leaves, of blossom
in field and garden and wood. The whole world bloomed in a flush and
tremor of maiden loveliness, instinct with all the evasive, fleeting
charm of spring and girlhood and young morning. We felt and enjoyed it
all without understanding or analyzing it. It was enough to be glad and
young with spring on the golden road.

"I don't like excitement very much," said Cecily. "It makes one so
tired. I'm sure it was exciting enough when Paddy was missing, but we
didn't find that very pleasant."

"No, but it was interesting," returned the Story Girl thoughtfully.
"After all, I believe I'd rather be miserable than dull."

"I wouldn't then," said Felicity decidedly. "And you need never be dull
when you have work to do. 'Satan finds some mischief still for idle
hands to do!'"

"Well, mischief is interesting," laughed the Story Girl. "And I thought
you didn't think it lady-like to speak of that person, Felicity?"

"It's all right if you call him by his polite name," said Felicity
stiffly.

"Why does the Lombardy poplar hold its branches straight up in the
air like that, when all the other poplars hold theirs out or hang them
down?" interjected Peter, who had been gazing intently at the slender
spire showing darkly against the fine blue eastern sky.

"Because it grows that way," said Felicity.

"Oh I know a story about that," cried the Story Girl. "Once upon a time
an old man found the pot of gold at the rainbow's end. There IS a pot
there, it is said, but it is very hard to find because you can never get
to the rainbow's end before it vanishes from your sight. But this old
man found it, just at sunset, when Iris, the guardian of the rainbow
gold, happened to be absent. As he was a long way from home, and the pot
was very big and heavy, he decided to hide it until morning and then get
one of his sons to go with him and help him carry it. So he hid it under
the boughs of the sleeping poplar tree.

"When Iris came back she missed the pot of gold and of course she was in
a sad way about it. She sent Mercury, the messenger of the gods, to
look for it, for she didn't dare leave the rainbow again, lest somebody
should run off with that too. Mercury asked all the trees if they had
seen the pot of gold, and the elm, oak and pine pointed to the poplar
and said,

"'The poplar can tell you where it is.'

"'How can I tell you where it is?' cried the poplar, and she held up all
her branches in surprise, just as we hold up our hands--and down tumbled
the pot of gold. The poplar was amazed and indignant, for she was a very
honest tree. She stretched her boughs high above her head and declared
that she would always hold them like that, so that nobody could hide
stolen gold under them again. And she taught all the little poplars she
knew to stand the same way, and that is why Lombardy poplars always do.
But the aspen poplar leaves are always shaking, even on the very calmest
day. And do you know why?"

And then she told us the old legend that the cross on which the Saviour
of the world suffered was made of aspen poplar wood and so never again
could its poor, shaken, shivering leaves know rest or peace. There was
an aspen in the orchard, the very embodiment of youth and spring in its
litheness and symmetry. Its little leaves were hanging tremulously, not
yet so fully blown as to hide its development of bough and twig, making
poetry against the spiritual tints of a spring sunset.

"It does look sad," said Peter, "but it is a pretty tree, and it wasn't
its fault."

"There's a heavy dew and it's time we stopped talking nonsense and went
in," decreed Felicity. "If we don't we'll all have a cold, and then
we'll be miserable enough, but it won't be very exciting."

"All the same, I wish something exciting would happen," finished the
Story Girl, as we walked up through the orchard, peopled with its
nun-like shadows.

"There's a new moon tonight, so may be you'll get your wish," said
Peter. "My Aunt Jane didn't believe there was anything in the moon
business, but you never can tell."

The Story Girl did get her wish. Something happened the very next day.
She joined us in the afternoon with a quite indescribable expression
on her face, compounded of triumph, anticipation, and regret. Her
eyes betrayed that she had been crying, but in them shone a chastened
exultation. Whatever the Story Girl mourned over it was evident she was
not without hope.

"I have some news to tell you," she said importantly. "Can you guess
what it is?"

We couldn't and wouldn't try.

"Tell us right off," implored Felix. "You look as if it was something
tremendous."

"So it is. Listen--Aunt Olivia is going to be married."

We stared in blank amazement. Peg Bowen's hint had faded from our minds
and we had never put much faith in it.

"Aunt Olivia! I don't believe it," cried Felicity flatly. "Who told
you?"

"Aunt Olivia herself. So it is perfectly true. I'm awfully sorry in one
way--but oh, won't it be splendid to have a real wedding in the family?
She's going to have a big wedding--and I am to be bridesmaid."

"I shouldn't think you were old enough to be a bridesmaid," said
Felicity sharply.

"I'm nearly fifteen. Anyway, Aunt Olivia says I have to be."

"Who's she going to marry?" asked Cecily, gathering herself together
after the shock, and finding that the world was going on just the same.

"His name is Dr. Seton and he is a Halifax man. She met him when she
was at Uncle Edward's last summer. They've been engaged ever since. The
wedding is to be the third week in June."

"And our school concert comes off the next week," complained Felicity.
"Why do things always come together like that? And what are you going to
do if Aunt Olivia is going away?"

"I'm coming to live at your house," answered the Story Girl rather
timidly. She did not know how Felicity might like that. But Felicity
took it rather well.

"You've been here most of the time anyhow, so it'll just be that you'll
sleep and eat here, too. But what's to become of Uncle Roger?"

"Aunt Olivia says he'll have to get married, too. But Uncle Roger says
he'd rather hire a housekeeper than marry one, because in the first case
he could turn her off if he didn't like her, but in the second case he
couldn't."

"There'll be a lot of cooking to do for the wedding," reflected Felicity
in a tone of satisfaction.

"I s'pose Aunt Olivia will want some rusks made. I hope she has plenty
of tooth-powder laid in," said Dan.

"It's a pity you don't use some of that tooth-powder you're so fond of
talking about yourself," retorted Felicity. "When anyone has a mouth the
size of yours the teeth show so plain."

"I brush my teeth every Sunday," asseverated Dan.

"Every Sunday! You ought to brush them every DAY."

"Did anyone ever hear such nonsense?" demanded Dan sincerely.

"Well, you know, it really does say so in the Family Guide," said Cecily
quietly.

"Then the Family Guide people must have lots more spare time than I
have," retorted Dan contemptuously.

"Just think, the Story Girl will have her name in the papers if she's
bridesmaid," marvelled Sara Ray.

"In the Halifax papers, too," added Felix, "since Dr. Seton is a Halifax
man. What is his first name?"

"Robert."

"And will we have to call him Uncle Robert?"

"Not until he's married to her. Then we will, of course."

"I hope your Aunt Olivia won't disappear before the ceremony," remarked
Sara Ray, who was surreptitiously reading "The Vanquished Bride," by
Valeria H. Montague in the Family Guide.

"I hope Dr. Seton won't fail to show up, like your cousin Rachel Ward's
beau," said Peter.

"That makes me think of another story I read the other day about
Great-uncle Andrew King and Aunt Georgina," laughed the Story Girl. "It
happened eighty years ago. It was a very stormy winter and the roads
were bad. Uncle Andrew lived in Carlisle, and Aunt Georgina--she was
Miss Georgina Matheson then--lived away up west, so he couldn't get to
see her very often. They agreed to be married that winter, but Georgina
couldn't set the day exactly because her brother, who lived in Ontario,
was coming home for a visit, and she wanted to be married while he was
home. So it was arranged that she was to write Uncle Andrew and tell him
what day to come. She did, and she told him to come on a Tuesday. But
her writing wasn't very good and poor Uncle Andrew thought she wrote
Thursday. So on Thursday he drove all the way to Georgina's home to be
married. It was forty miles and a bitter cold day. But it wasn't any
colder than the reception he got from Georgina. She was out in the
porch, with her head tied up in a towel, picking geese. She had been
all ready Tuesday, and her friends and the minister were there, and the
wedding supper prepared. But there was no bridegroom and Georgina was
furious. Nothing Uncle Andrew could say would appease her. She wouldn't
listen to a word of explanation, but told him to go, and never show his
nose there again. So poor Uncle Andrew had to go ruefully home, hoping
that she would relent later on, because he was really very much in love
with her."

"And did she?" queried Felicity.

"She did. Thirteen years exactly from that day they were married. It
took her just that long to forgive him."

"It took her just that long to find out she couldn't get anybody else,"
said Dan, cynically.




CHAPTER XIV. A PRODIGAL RETURNS


Aunt Olivia and the Story Girl lived in a whirlwind of dressmaking after
that, and enjoyed it hugely. Cecily and Felicity also had to have
new dresses for the great event, and they talked of little else for a
fortnight. Cecily declared that she hated to go to sleep because she
was sure to dream that she was at Aunt Olivia's wedding in her old faded
gingham dress and a ragged apron.

"And no shoes or stockings," she added, "and I can't move, and everyone
walks past and looks at my feet."

"That's only in a dream," mourned Sara Ray, "but I may have to wear my
last summer's white dress to the wedding. It's too short, but ma says
it's plenty good for this summer. I'll be so mortified if I have to wear
it."

"I'd rather not go at all than wear a dress that wasn't nice," said
Felicity pleasantly.

"I'd go to the wedding if I had to go in my school dress," cried Sara
Ray. "I've never been to anything. I wouldn't miss it for the world."

"My Aunt Jane always said that if you were neat and tidy it didn't
matter whether you were dressed fine or not," said Peter.

"I'm sick and tired of hearing about your Aunt Jane," said Felicity
crossly.

Peter looked grieved but held his peace. Felicity was very hard on him
that spring, but his loyalty never wavered. Everything she said or did
was right in Peter's eyes.

"It's all very well to be neat and tidy," said Sara Ray, "but I like a
little style too."

"I think you'll find your mother will get you a new dress after all,"
comforted Cecily. "Anyway, nobody will notice you because everyone will
be looking at the bride. Aunt Olivia will make a lovely bride. Just
think how sweet she'll look in a white silk dress and a floating veil."

"She says she is going to have the ceremony performed out here in
the orchard under her own tree," said the Story Girl. "Won't that be
romantic? It almost makes me feel like getting married myself."

"What a way to talk," rebuked Felicity, "and you only fifteen."

"Lots of people have been married at fifteen," laughed the Story Girl.
"Lady Jane Gray was."

"But you are always saying that Valeria H. Montague's stories are silly
and not true to life, so that is no argument," retorted Felicity, who
knew more about cooking than about history, and evidently imagined that
the Lady Jane Gray was one of Valeria's titled heroines.

The wedding was a perennial source of conversation among us in those
days; but presently its interest palled for a time in the light of
another quite tremendous happening. One Saturday night Peter's mother
called to take him home with her for Sunday. She had been working at Mr.
James Frewen's, and Mr. Frewen was driving her home. We had never seen
Peter's mother before, and we looked at her with discreet curiosity. She
was a plump, black-eyed little woman, neat as a pin, but with a rather
tired and care-worn face that looked as if it should have been rosy and
jolly. Life had been a hard battle for her, and I rather think that her
curly-headed little lad was all that had kept heart and spirit in her.
Peter went home with her and returned Sunday evening. We were in the
orchard sitting around the Pulpit Stone, where we had, according to the
custom of the households of King, been learning our golden texts and
memory verses for the next Sunday School lesson. Paddy, grown sleek and
handsome again, was sitting on the stone itself, washing his jowls.

Peter joined us with a very queer expression on his face. He seemed
bursting with some news which he wanted to tell and yet hardly liked to.

"Why are you looking so mysterious, Peter?" demanded the Story Girl.

"What do you think has happened?" asked Peter solemnly.

"What has?"

"My father has come home," answered Peter.

The announcement produced all the sensation he could have wished. We
crowded around him in excitement.

"Peter! When did he come back?"

"Saturday night. He was there when ma and I got home. It give her an
awful turn. I didn't know him at first, of course."

"Peter Craig, I believe you are glad your father has come back," cried
the Story Girl.

"'Course I'm glad," retorted Peter.

"And after you saying you didn't want ever to see him again," said
Felicity.

"You just wait. You haven't heard my story yet. I wouldn't have been
glad to see father if he'd come back the same as he went away. But he is
a changed man. He happened to go into a revival meeting one night this
spring and he got converted. And he's come home to stay, and he says
he's never going to drink another drop, but he's going to look after his
family. Ma isn't to do any more washing for nobody but him and me, and
I'm not to be a hired boy any longer. He says I can stay with your Uncle
Roger till the fall 'cause I promised I would, but after that I'm to
stay home and go to school right along and learn to be whatever I'd like
to be. I tell you it made me feel queer. Everything seemed to be upset.
But he gave ma forty dollars--every cent he had--so I guess he really is
converted."

"I hope it will last, I'm sure," said Felicity. She did not say it
nastily, however. We were all glad for Peter's sake, though a little
dizzy over the unexpectedness of it all.

"This is what I'D like to know," said Peter. "How did Peg Bowen know my
father was coming home? Don't you tell me she isn't a witch after that."

"And she knew about your Aunt Olivia's wedding, too," added Sara Ray.

"Oh, well, she likely heard that from some one. Grown up folks talk
things over long before they tell them to children," said Cecily.

"Well, she couldn't have heard father was coming home from any one,"
answered Peter. "He was converted up in Maine, where nobody knew him,
and he never told a soul he was coming till he got here. No, you can
believe what you like, but I'm satisfied at last that Peg is a witch and
that skull of hers does tell her things. She told me father was coming
home and he come!"

"How happy you must be," sighed Sara Ray romantically. "It's just like
that story in the Family Guide, where the missing earl comes home to his
family just as the Countess and Lady Violetta are going to be turned out
by the cruel heir."

Felicity sniffed.

"There's some difference, I guess. The earl had been imprisoned for
years in a loathsome dungeon."

Perhaps Peter's father had too, if we but realized it--imprisoned in the
dungeon of his own evil appetites and habits, than which none could
be more loathsome. But a Power, mightier than the forces of evil, had
struck off his fetters and led him back to his long-forfeited liberty
and light. And no countess or lady of high degree could have welcomed a
long-lost earl home more joyfully than the tired little washerwoman had
welcomed the erring husband of her youth.

But in Peter's ointment of joy there was a fly or two. So very, very few
things are flawless in this world, even on the golden road.

"Of course I'm awful glad that father has come back and that ma won't
have to wash any more," he said with a sigh, "but there are two things
that kind of worry me. My Aunt Jane always said that it didn't do any
good to worry, and I s'pose it don't, but it's kind of a relief."

"What's worrying you?" asked Felix.

"Well, for one thing I'll feel awful bad to go away from you all. I'll
miss you just dreadful, and I won't even be able to go to the same
school. I'll have to go to Markdale school."

"But you must come and see us often," said Felicity graciously.
"Markdale isn't so far away, and you could spend every other Saturday
afternoon with us anyway."

Peter's black eyes filled with adoring gratitude.

"That's so kind of you, Felicity. I'll come as often as I can, of
course; but it won't be the same as being around with you all the time.
The other thing is even worse. You see, it was a Methodist revival
father got converted in, and so of course he joined the Methodist
church. He wasn't anything before. He used to say he was a Nothingarian
and lived up to it--kind of bragging like. But he's a strong Methodist
now, and is going to go to Markdale Methodist church and pay to the
salary. Now what'll he say when I tell him I'm a Presbyterian?"

"You haven't told him, yet?" asked the Story Girl.

"No, I didn't dare. I was scared he'd say I'd have to be a Methodist."

"Well, Methodists are pretty near as good as Presbyterians," said
Felicity, with the air of one making a great concession.

"I guess they're every bit as good," retorted Peter. "But that ain't the
point. I've got to be a Presbyterian, 'cause I stick to a thing when I
once decide it. But I expect father will be mad when he finds out."

"If he's converted he oughtn't to get mad," said Dan.

"Well, lots o' people do. But if he isn't mad he'll be sorry, and
that'll be even worse, for a Presbyterian I'm bound to be. But I expect
it will make things unpleasant."

"You needn't tell him anything about it," advised Felicity. "Just keep
quiet and go to the Methodist church until you get big, and then you can
go where you please."

"No, that wouldn't be honest," said Peter sturdily. "My Aunt Jane
always said it was best to be open and above board in everything, and
especially in religion. So I'll tell father right out, but I'll wait a
few weeks so as not to spoil things for ma too soon if he acts up."

Peter was not the only one who had secret cares. Sara Ray was beginning
to feel worried over her looks. I heard her and Cecily talking over
their troubles one evening while I was weeding the onion bed and they
were behind the hedge knitting lace. I did not mean to eavesdrop.
I supposed they knew I was there until Cecily overwhelmed me with
indignation later on.

"I'm so afraid, Cecily, that I'm going to be homely all my life," said
poor Sara with a tremble in her voice. "You can stand being ugly when
you are young if you have any hope of being better looking when you grow
up. But I'm getting worse. Aunt Mary says I'm going to be the very
image of Aunt Matilda. And Aunt Matilda is as homely as she can be. It
isn't"--and poor Sara sighed--"a very cheerful prospect. If I am ugly
nobody will ever want to marry me, and," concluded Sara candidly, "I
don't want to be an old maid."

"But plenty of girls get married who aren't a bit pretty," comforted
Cecily. "Besides, you are real nice looking at times, Sara. I think you
are going to have a nice figure."

"But just look at my hands," moaned Sara. "They're simply covered with
warts."

"Oh, the warts will all disappear before you grow up," said Cecily.

"But they won't disappear before the school concert. How am I to get
up there and recite? You know there is one line in my recitation, 'She
waved her lily-white hand,' and I have to wave mine when I say it. Fancy
waving a lily-white hand all covered with warts. I've tried every remedy
I ever heard of, but nothing does any good. Judy Pineau said if I rubbed
them with toad-spit it would take them away for sure. But how am I to
get any toad-spit?"

"It doesn't sound like a very nice remedy, anyhow," shuddered Cecily.
"I'd rather have the warts. But do you know, I believe if you didn't cry
so much over every little thing, you'd be ever so much better looking.
Crying spoils your eyes and makes the end of your nose red."

"I can't help crying," protested Sara. "My feelings are so very
sensitive. I've given up trying to keep THAT resolution."

"Well, men don't like cry-babies," said Cecily sagely. Cecily had a good
deal of Mother Eve's wisdom tucked away in that smooth, brown head of
hers.

"Cecily, do you ever intend to be married?" asked Sara in a confidential
tone.

"Goodness!" cried Cecily, quite shocked. "It will be time enough when I
grow up to think of that, Sara."

"I should think you'd have to think of it now, with Cyrus Brisk as crazy
after you as he is."

"I wish Cyrus Brisk was at the bottom of the Red Sea," exclaimed Cecily,
goaded into a spurt of temper by mention of the detested name.

"What has Cyrus been doing now?" asked Felicity, coming around the
corner of the hedge.

"Doing NOW! It's ALL the time. He just worries me to death," returned
Cecily angrily. "He keeps writing me letters and putting them in my desk
or in my reader. I never answer one of them, but he keeps on. And in the
last one, mind you, he said he'd do something desperate right off if I
wouldn't promise to marry him when we grew up."

"Just think, Cecily, you've had a proposal already," said Sara Ray in an
awe-struck tone.

"But he hasn't done anything desperate yet, and that was last week,"
commented Felicity, with a toss of her head.

"He sent me a lock of his hair and wanted one of mine in exchange,"
continued Cecily indignantly. "I tell you I sent his back to him pretty
quick."

"Did you never answer any of his letters?" asked Sara Ray.

"No, indeed! I guess not!"

"Do you know," said Felicity, "I believe if you wrote him just once and
told him your exact opinion of him in good plain English it would cure
him of his nonsense."

"I couldn't do that. I haven't enough spunk," confessed Cecily with a
blush. "But I'll tell you what I did do once. He wrote me a long letter
last week. It was just awfully SOFT, and every other word was spelled
wrong. He even spelled baking soda, 'bacon soda!'"

"What on earth had he to say about baking soda in a love-letter?" asked
Felicity.

"Oh, he said his mother sent him to the store for some and he forgot it
because he was thinking about me. Well, I just took his letter and wrote
in all the words, spelled right, above the wrong ones, in red ink, just
as Mr. Perkins makes us do with our dictation exercises, and sent it
back to him. I thought maybe he'd feel insulted and stop writing to me."

"And did he?"

"No, he didn't. It is my opinion you can't insult Cyrus Brisk. He is too
thick-skinned. He wrote another letter, and thanked me for correcting
his mistakes, and said it made him feel glad because it showed I was
beginning to take an interest in him when I wanted him to spell better.
Did you ever? Miss Marwood says it is wrong to hate anyone, but I don't
care, I hate Cyrus Brisk."

"Mrs. Cyrus Brisk WOULD be an awful name," giggled Felicity.

"Flossie Brisk says Cyrus is ruining all the trees on his father's place
cutting your name on them," said Sara Ray. "His father told him he would
whip him if he didn't stop, but Cyrus keeps right on. He told Flossie it
relieved his feelings. Flossie says he cut yours and his together on the
birch tree in front of the parlour window, and a row of hearts around
them."

"Just where every visitor can see them, I suppose," lamented Cecily. "He
just worries my life out. And what I mind most of all is, he sits and
looks at me in school with such melancholy, reproachful eyes when he
ought to be working sums. I won't look at him, but I FEEL him staring at
me, and it makes me so nervous."

"They say his mother was out of her mind at one time," said Felicity.

I do not think Felicity was quite well pleased that Cyrus should have
passed over her rose-red prettiness to set his affections on that demure
elf of a Cecily. She did not want the allegiance of Cyrus in the least,
but it was something of a slight that he had not wanted her to want it.

"And he sends me pieces of poetry he cuts out of the papers," Cecily
went on, "with lots of the lines marked with a lead pencil. Yesterday he
put one in his letter, and this is what he marked:


    "'If you will not relent to me
     Then must I learn to know
     Darkness alone till life be flown.

Here--I have the piece in my sewing-bag--I'll read it all to you."

Those three graceless girls read the sentimental rhyme and giggled over
it. Poor Cyrus! His young affections were sadly misplaced. But after
all, though Cecily never relented towards him, he did not condemn
himself to darkness alone till life was flown. Quite early in life he
wedded a stout, rosy, buxom lass, the very antithesis of his first love;
he prospered in his undertakings, raised a large and respectable family,
and was eventually appointed a Justice of the Peace. Which was all very
sensible of Cyrus.




CHAPTER XV. THE RAPE OF THE LOCK


June was crowded full of interest that year. We gathered in with
its sheaf of fragrant days the choicest harvest of childhood. Things
happened right along. Cecily declared she hated to go to sleep for fear
she might miss something. There were so many dear delights along the
golden road to give us pleasure--the earth dappled with new blossom,
the dance of shadows in the fields, the rustling, rain-wet ways of the
woods, the faint fragrance in meadow lanes, liltings of birds and croon
of bees in the old orchard, windy pipings on the hills, sunset behind
the pines, limpid dews filling primrose cups, crescent moons through
darklings boughs, soft nights alight with blinking stars. We enjoyed
all these boons, unthinkingly and light-heartedly, as children do. And
besides these, there was the absorbing little drama of human life
which was being enacted all around us, and in which each of us played
a satisfying part--the gay preparations for Aunt Olivia's mid-June
wedding, the excitement of practising for the concert with which our
school-teacher, Mr. Perkins, had elected to close the school year, and
Cecily's troubles with Cyrus Brisk, which furnished unholy mirth for the
rest of us, though Cecily could not see the funny side of it at all.

Matters went from bad to worse in the case of the irrepressible Cyrus.
He continued to shower Cecily with notes, the spelling of which showed
no improvement; he worried the life out of her by constantly threatening
to fight Willy Fraser--although, as Felicity sarcastically pointed out,
he never did it.

"But I'm always afraid he will," said Cecily, "and it would be such a
DISGRACE to have two boys fighting over me in school."

"You must have encouraged Cyrus a little in the beginning or he'd never
have been so persevering," said Felicity unjustly.

"I never did!" cried outraged Cecily. "You know very well, Felicity
King, that I hated Cyrus Brisk ever since the very first time I saw his
big, fat, red face. So there!"

"Felicity is just jealous because Cyrus didn't take a notion to her
instead of you, Sis," said Dan.

"Talk sense!" snapped Felicity.

"If I did you wouldn't understand me, sweet little sister," rejoined
aggravating Dan.

Finally Cyrus crowned his iniquities by stealing the denied lock of
Cecily's hair. One sunny afternoon in school, Cecily and Kitty Marr
asked and received permission to sit out on the side bench before
the open window, where the cool breeze swept in from the green fields
beyond. To sit on this bench was always considered a treat, and was only
allowed as a reward of merit; but Cecily and Kitty had another reason
for wishing to sit there. Kitty had read in a magazine that sun-baths
were good for the hair; so both she and Cecily tossed their long braids
over the window-sill and let them hang there in the broiling sun-shine.
And while Cecily sat thus, diligently working a fraction sum on her
slate, that base Cyrus asked permission to go out, having previously
borrowed a pair of scissors from one of the big girls who did fancy work
at the noon recess. Outside, Cyrus sneaked up close to the window and
cut off a piece of Cecily's hair.

This rape of the lock did not produce quite such terrible consequences
as the more famous one in Pope's poem, but Cecily's soul was no less
agitated than Belinda's. She cried all the way home from school about
it, and only checked her tears when Dan declared he'd fight Cyrus and
make him give it up.

"Oh, no, You mustn't." said Cecily, struggling with her sobs. "I won't
have you fighting on my account for anything. And besides, he'd likely
lick you--he's so big and rough. And the folks at home might find out
all about it, and Uncle Roger would never give me any peace, and mother
would be cross, for she'd never believe it wasn't my fault. It wouldn't
be so bad if he'd only taken a little, but he cut a great big chunk
right off the end of one of the braids. Just look at it. I'll have to
cut the other to make them fair--and they'll look so awful stubby."

But Cyrus' acquirement of the chunk of hair was his last triumph.
His downfall was near; and, although it involved Cecily in a most
humiliating experience, over which she cried half the following night,
in the end she confessed it was worth undergoing just to get rid of
Cyrus.

Mr. Perkins was an exceedingly strict disciplinarian. No communication
of any sort was permitted between his pupils during school hours. Anyone
caught violating this rule was promptly punished by the infliction of
one of the weird penances for which Mr. Perkins was famous, and which
were generally far worse than ordinary whipping.

One day in school Cyrus sent a letter across to Cecily. Usually he left
his effusions in her desk, or between the leaves of her books; but this
time it was passed over to her under cover of the desk through the hands
of two or three scholars. Just as Em Frewen held it over the aisle Mr.
Perkins wheeled around from his station before the blackboard and caught
her in the act.

"Bring that here, Emmeline," he commanded.

Cyrus turned quite pale. Em carried the note to Mr. Perkins. He took it,
held it up, and scrutinized the address.

"Did you write this to Cecily, Emmeline?" he asked.

"No, sir."

"Who wrote it then?"

Em said quite shamelessly that she didn't know--it had just been passed
over from the next row.

"And I suppose you have no idea where it came from?" said Mr. Perkins,
with his frightful, sardonic grin. "Well, perhaps Cecily can tell us.
You may take your seat, Emmeline, and you will remain at the foot of
your spelling class for a week as punishment for passing the note.
Cecily, come here."

Indignant Em sat down and poor, innocent Cecily was haled forth to
public ignominy. She went with a crimson face.

"Cecily," said her tormentor, "do you know who wrote this letter to
you?"

Cecily, like a certain renowned personage, could not tell a lie.

"I--I think so, sir," she murmured faintly.

"Who was it?"

"I can't tell you that," stammered Cecily, on the verge of tears.

"Ah!" said Mr. Perkins politely. "Well, I suppose I could easily find
out by opening it. But it is very impolite to open other people's
letters. I think I have a better plan. Since you refuse to tell me who
wrote it, open it yourself, take this chalk, and copy the contents on
the blackboard that we may all enjoy them. And sign the writer's name at
the bottom."

"Oh," gasped Cecily, choosing the lesser of two evils, "I'll tell you
who wrote it--it was--

"Hush!" Mr. Perkins checked her with a gentle motion of his hand. He
was always most gentle when most inexorable. "You did not obey me when
I first ordered you to tell me the writer. You cannot have the privilege
of doing so now. Open the note, take the chalk, and do as I command
you."

Worms will turn, and even meek, mild, obedient little souls like Cecily
may be goaded to the point of wild, sheer rebellion.

"I--I won't!" she cried passionately.

Mr. Perkins, martinet though he was, would hardly, I think, have
inflicted such a punishment on Cecily, who was a favourite of his, had
he known the real nature of that luckless missive. But, as he afterwards
admitted, he thought it was merely a note from some other girl, of such
trifling sort as school-girls are wont to write; and moreover, he had
already committed himself to the decree, which, like those of Mede and
Persian, must not alter. To let Cecily off, after her mad defiance,
would be to establish a revolutionary precedent.

"So you really think you won't?" he queried smilingly. "Well, on second
thoughts, you may take your choice. Either you will do as I have bidden
you, or you will sit for three days with"--Mr. Perkins' eye skimmed over
the school-room to find a boy who was sitting alone--"with Cyrus Brisk."

This choice of Mr. Perkins, who knew nothing of the little drama of
emotions that went on under the routine of lessons and exercises in his
domain, was purely accidental, but we took it at the time as a stroke of
diabolical genius. It left Cecily no choice. She would have done almost
anything before she would have sat with Cyrus Brisk. With flashing
eyes she tore open the letter, snatched up the chalk, and dashed at the
blackboard.

In a few minutes the contents of that letter graced the expanse usually
sacred to more prosaic compositions. I cannot reproduce it verbatim, for
I had no after opportunity of refreshing my memory. But I remember that
it was exceedingly sentimental and exceedingly ill-spelled--for Cecily
mercilessly copied down poor Cyrus' mistakes. He wrote her that he wore
her hare over his hart--"and he stole it," Cecily threw passionately
over her shoulder at Mr. Perkins--that her eyes were so sweet and lovely
that he couldn't find words nice enuf to describ them, that he could
never forget how butiful she had looked in prar meeting the evening
before, and that some meels he couldn't eat for thinking of her, with
more to the same effect and he signed it "yours till deth us do part,
Cyrus Brisk."

As the writing proceeded we scholars exploded into smothered laughter,
despite our awe of Mr. Perkins. Mr. Perkins himself could not keep a
straight face. He turned abruptly away and looked out of the window,
but we could see his shoulders shaking. When Cecily had finished and
had thrown down the chalk with bitter vehemence, he turned around with a
very red face.

"That will do. You may sit down. Cyrus, since it seems you are the
guilty person, take the eraser and wipe that off the board. Then go
stand in the corner, facing the room, and hold your arms straight above
your head until I tell you to take them down."

Cyrus obeyed and Cecily fled to her seat and wept, nor did Mr. Perkins
meddle with her more that day. She bore her burden of humiliation
bitterly for several days, until she was suddenly comforted by a
realization that Cyrus had ceased to persecute her. He wrote no more
letters, he gazed no longer in rapt adoration, he brought no more votive
offerings of gum and pencils to her shrine. At first we thought he had
been cured by the unmerciful chaffing he had to undergo from his mates,
but eventually his sister told Cecily the true reason. Cyrus had at last
been driven to believe that Cecily's aversion to him was real, and not
merely the defence of maiden coyness. If she hated him so intensely that
she would rather write that note on the blackboard than sit with him,
what use was it to sigh like a furnace longer for her? Mr. Perkins had
blighted love's young dream for Cyrus with a killing frost. Thenceforth
sweet Cecily kept the noiseless tenor of her way unvexed by the
attentions of enamoured swains.




CHAPTER XVI. AUNT UNA'S STORY


Felicity, and Cecily, Dan, Felix, Sara Ray and I were sitting one
evening on the mossy stones in Uncle Roger's hill pasture, where we had
sat the morning the Story Girl told us the tale of the Wedding Veil of
the Proud Princess. But it was evening now and the valley beneath us was
brimmed up with the glow of the afterlight. Behind us, two tall, shapely
spruce trees rose up against the sunset, and through the dark oriel of
their sundered branches an evening star looked down. We sat on a little
strip of emerald grassland and before us was a sloping meadow all white
with daisies.

We were waiting for Peter and the Story Girl. Peter had gone to Markdale
after dinner to spend the afternoon with his reunited parents because
it was his birthday. He had left us grimly determined to confess to his
father the dark secret of his Presbyterianism, and we were anxious to
know what the result had been. The Story Girl had gone that morning
with Miss Reade to visit the latter's home near Charlottetown, and we
expected soon to see her coming gaily along over the fields from the
Armstrong place.

Presently Peter came jauntily stepping along the field path up the hill.

"Hasn't Peter got tall?" said Cecily.

"Peter is growing to be a very fine looking boy," decreed Felicity.

"I notice he's got ever so much handsomer since his father came home,"
said Dan, with a killing sarcasm that was wholly lost on Felicity, who
gravely responded that she supposed it was because Peter felt so much
freer from care and responsibility.

"What luck, Peter?" yelled Dan, as soon as Peter was within earshot.

"Everything's all right," he shouted jubilantly. "I told father right
off, licketty-split, as soon as I got home," he added when he reached
us. "I was anxious to have it over with. I says, solemn-like, 'Dad,
there's something I've got to tell you, and I don't know how you'll take
it, but it can't be helped,' I says. Dad looked pretty sober, and he
says, says he, 'What have you been up to, Peter? Don't be afraid to tell
me. I've been forgiven to seventy times seven, so surely I can forgive a
little, too?' 'Well,' I says, desperate-like, 'the truth is, father, I'm
a Presbyterian. I made up my mind last summer, the time of the Judgment
Day, that I'd be a Presbyterian, and I've got to stick to it. I'm sorry
I can't be a Methodist, like you and mother and Aunt Jane, but I can't
and that's all there is to it,' I says. Then I waited, scared-like. But
father, he just looked relieved and he says, says he, 'Goodness, boy,
you can be a Presbyterian or anything else you like, so long as it's
Protestant. I'm not caring,' he says. 'The main thing is that you must
be good and do what's right.' I tell you," concluded Peter emphatically,
"father is a Christian all right."

"Well, I suppose your mind will be at rest now," said Felicity. "What's
that you have in your buttonhole?"

"That's a four-leaved clover," answered Peter exultantly. "That means
good luck for the summer. I found it in Markdale. There ain't much
clover in Carlisle this year of any kind of leaf. The crop is going to
be a failure. Your Uncle Roger says it's because there ain't enough
old maids in Carlisle. There's lots of them in Markdale, and that's the
reason, he says, why they always have such good clover crops there."

"What on earth have old maids to do with it?" cried Cecily.

"I don't believe they've a single thing to do with it, but Mr. Roger
says they have, and he says a man called Darwin proved it. This is the
rigmarole he got off to me the other day. The clover crop depends on
there being plenty of bumble-bees, because they are the only insects
with tongues long enough to--to--fer--fertilize--I think he called it
the blossoms. But mice eat bumble-bees and cats eat mice and old maids
keep cats. So your Uncle Roger says the more old maids the more cats,
and the more cats the fewer field-mice, and the fewer field-mice the
more bumble-bees, and the more bumble-bees the better clover crops."

"So don't worry if you do get to be old maids, girls," said Dan.
"Remember, you'll be helping the clover crops."

"I never heard such stuff as you boys talk," said Felicity, "and Uncle
Roger is no better."

"There comes the Story Girl," cried Cecily eagerly. "Now we'll hear all
about Beautiful Alice's home."

The Story Girl was bombarded with eager questions as soon as she
arrived. Miss Reade's home was a dream of a place, it appeared. The
house was just covered with ivy and there was a most delightful old
garden--"and," added the Story Girl, with the joy of a connoisseur who
has found a rare gem, "the sweetest little story connected with it. And
I saw the hero of the story too."

"Where was the heroine?" queried Cecily.

"She is dead."

"Oh, of course she'd have to die," exclaimed Dan in disgust. "I'd like a
story where somebody lived once in awhile."

"I've told you heaps of stories where people lived," retorted the Story
Girl. "If this heroine hadn't died there wouldn't have been any story.
She was Miss Reade's aunt and her name was Una, and I believe she must
have been just like Miss Reade herself. Miss Reade told me all about
her. When we went into the garden I saw in one corner of it an old stone
bench arched over by a couple of pear trees and all grown about with
grass and violets. And an old man was sitting on it--a bent old man with
long, snow-white hair and beautiful sad blue eyes. He seemed very lonely
and sorrowful and I wondered that Miss Reade didn't speak to him. But
she never let on she saw him and took me away to another part of the
garden. After awhile he got up and went away and then Miss Reade said,
'Come over to Aunt Una's seat and I will tell you about her and her
lover--that man who has just gone out.'

"'Oh, isn't he too old for a lover?' I said.

"Beautiful Alice laughed and said it was forty years since he had been
her Aunt Una's lover. He had been a tall, handsome young man then, and
her Aunt Una was a beautiful girl of nineteen.

"We went over and sat down and Miss Reade told me all about her. She
said that when she was a child she had heard much of her Aunt Una--that
she seemed to have been one of those people who are not soon forgotten,
whose personality seems to linger about the scenes of their lives long
after they have passed away."

"What is a personality? Is it another word for ghost?" asked Peter.

"No," said the Story Girl shortly. "I can't stop in a story to explain
words."

"I don't believe you know what it is yourself," said Felicity.

The Story Girl picked up her hat, which she had thrown down on the
grass, and placed it defiantly on her brown curls.

"I'm going in," she announced. "I have to help Aunt Olivia ice a cake
tonight, and you all seem more interested in dictionaries than stories."

"That's not fair," I exclaimed. "Dan and Felix and Sara Ray and Cecily
and I have never said a word. It's mean to punish us for what Peter and
Felicity did. We want to hear the rest of the story. Never mind what a
personality is but go on--and, Peter, you young ass, keep still."

"I only wanted to know," muttered Peter sulkily.

"I DO know what personality is, but it's hard to explain," said the
Story Girl, relenting. "It's what makes you different from Dan, Peter,
and me different from Felicity or Cecily. Miss Reade's Aunt Una had a
personality that was very uncommon. And she was beautiful, too, with
white skin and night-black eyes and hair--a 'moonlight beauty,' Miss
Reade called it. She used to keep a kind of a diary, and Miss Reade's
mother used to read parts of it to her. She wrote verses in it and they
were lovely; and she wrote descriptions of the old garden which she
loved very much. Miss Reade said that everything in the garden, plot
or shrub or tree, recalled to her mind some phrase or verse of her
Aunt Una's, so that the whole place seemed full of her, and her memory
haunted the walks like a faint, sweet perfume.

"Una had, as I've told you, a lover; and they were to have been married
on her twentieth birthday. Her wedding dress was to have been a gown of
white brocade with purple violets in it. But a little while before it
she took ill with fever and died; and she was buried on her birthday
instead of being married. It was just in the time of opening roses. Her
lover has been faithful to her ever since; he has never married, and
every June, on her birthday, he makes a pilgrimage to the old garden and
sits for a long time in silence on the bench where he used to woo her
on crimson eves and moonlight nights of long ago. Miss Reade says she
always loves to see him sitting there because it gives her such a deep
and lasting sense of the beauty and strength of love which can thus
outlive time and death. And sometimes, she says, it gives her a little
eerie feeling, too, as if her Aunt Una were really sitting there beside
him, keeping tryst, although she has been in her grave for forty years."

"It would be real romantic to die young and have your lover make a
pilgrimage to your garden every year," reflected Sara Ray.

"It would be more comfortable to go on living and get married to him,"
said Felicity. "Mother says all those sentimental ideas are bosh and I
expect they are. It's a wonder Beautiful Alice hasn't a beau herself.
She is so pretty and lady-like."

"The Carlisle fellows all say she is too stuck up," said Dan.

"There's nobody in Carlisle half good enough for her," cried the Story
Girl, "except--ex-cept--"

"Except who?" asked Felix.

"Never mind," said the Story Girl mysteriously.




CHAPTER XVII. AUNT OLIVIA'S WEDDING


What a delightful, old-fashioned, wholesome excitement there was about
Aunt Olivia's wedding! The Monday and Tuesday preceding it we did not go
to school at all, but were all kept home to do chores and run errands.
The cooking and decorating and arranging that went on those two days
was amazing, and Felicity was so happy over it all that she did not even
quarrel with Dan--though she narrowly escaped it when he told her that
the Governor's wife was coming to the wedding.

"Mind you have some of her favourite rusks for her," he said.

"I guess," said Felicity with dignity, "that Aunt Olivia's wedding
supper will be good enough for even a Governor's wife."

"I s'pose none of us except the Story Girl will get to the first table,"
said Felix, rather gloomily.

"Never mind," comforted Felicity. "There's a whole turkey to be kept for
us, and a freezerful of ice cream. Cecily and I are going to wait on the
tables, and we'll put away a little of everything that's extra nice for
our suppers."

"I do so want to have my supper with you," sighed Sara Ray, "but I
s'pose ma will drag me with her wherever she goes. She won't trust me
out of her sight a minute the whole evening--I know she won't."

"I'll get Aunt Olivia to ask her to let you have your supper with us,"
said Cecily. "She can't refuse the bride's request."

"You don't know all ma can do," returned Sara darkly. "No, I feel that
I'll have to eat my supper with her. But I suppose I ought to be very
thankful I'm to get to the wedding at all, and that ma did get me a
new white dress for it. Even yet I'm so scared something will happen to
prevent me from getting to it."

Monday evening shrouded itself in clouds, and all night long the voice
of the wind answered to the voice of the rain. Tuesday the downpour
continued. We were quite frantic about it. Suppose it kept on raining
over Wednesday! Aunt Olivia couldn't be married in the orchard then.
That would be too bad, especially when the late apple tree had most
obligingly kept its store of blossom until after all the other trees had
faded and then burst lavishly into bloom for Aunt Olivia's wedding. That
apple tree was always very late in blooming, and this year it was a week
later than usual. It was a sight to see--a great tree-pyramid with high,
far-spreading boughs, over which a wealth of rosy snow seemed to have
been flung. Never had bride a more magnificent canopy.

To our rapture, however, it cleared up beautifully Tuesday evening,
and the sun, before setting in purple pomp, poured a flood of wonderful
radiance over the whole great, green, diamond-dripping world, promising
a fair morrow. Uncle Alec drove off to the station through it to bring
home the bridegroom and his best man. Dan was full of a wild idea that
we should all meet them at the gate, armed with cowbells and tin-pans,
and "charivari" them up the lane. Peter sided with him, but the rest of
us voted down the suggestion.

"Do you want Dr. Seton to think we are a pack of wild Indians?" asked
Felicity severely. "A nice opinion he'd have of our manners!"

"Well, it's the only chance we'll have to chivaree them," grumbled Dan.
"Aunt Olivia wouldn't mind. SHE can take a joke."

"Ma would kill you if you did such a thing," warned Felicity. "Dr. Seton
lives in Halifax and they NEVER chivaree people there. He would think it
very vulgar."

"Then he should have stayed in Halifax and got married there," retorted
Dan, sulkily.

We were very curious to see our uncle-elect. When he came and Uncle
Alec took him into the parlour, we were all crowded into the dark corner
behind the stairs to peep at him. Then we fled to the moonlight world
outside and discussed him at the dairy.

"He's bald," said Cecily disappointedly.

"And RATHER short and stout," said Felicity.

"He's forty, if he's a day," said Dan.

"Never you mind," cried the Story Girl loyally, "Aunt Olivia loves him
with all her heart."

"And more than that, he's got lots of money," added Felicity.

"Well, he may be all right," said Peter, "but it's my opinion that your
Aunt Olivia could have done just as well on the Island."

"YOUR opinion doesn't matter very much to our family," said Felicity
crushingly.

But when we made the acquaintance of Dr. Seton next morning we liked him
enormously, and voted him a jolly good fellow. Even Peter remarked aside
to me that he guessed Miss Olivia hadn't made much of a mistake after
all, though it was plain he thought she was running a risk in not
sticking to the Island. The girls had not much time to discuss him with
us. They were all exceedingly busy and whisked about at such a rate
that they seemed to possess the power of being in half a dozen places
at once. The importance of Felicity was quite terrible. But after dinner
came a lull.

"Thank goodness, everything is ready at last," breathed Felicity
devoutly, as we foregathered for a brief space in the fir wood. "We've
nothing more to do now but get dressed. It's really a serious thing to
have a wedding in the family."

"I have a note from Sara Ray," said Cecily. "Judy Pineau brought it up
when she brought Mrs. Ray's spoons. Just let me read it to you:--


  DEAREST CECILY:--A DREADFUL MISFORTUNE has happened to me.  Last
  night I went with Judy to water the cows and in the spruce bush we
  found a WASPS' NEST and Judy thought it was AN OLD ONE and she
  POKED IT WITH A STICK.  And it was a NEW ONE, full of wasps, and
  they all flew out and STUNG US TERRIBLY, on the face and hands.
  My face is all swelled up and I can HARDLY SEE out of one eye.
  The SUFFERING was awful but I didn't mind that as much as being
  scared ma wouldn't take me to the wedding.  But she says I can go
  and I'm going.  I know that I am a HARD-LOOKING SIGHT, but it
  isn't anything catching.  I am writing this so that you won't get
  a shock when you see me.  Isn't it SO STRANGE to think your dear
  Aunt Olivia is going away?  How you will miss her!  But your loss
  will be her gain.

                    "'Au revoir,
                         "'Your loving chum,
                                     SARA RAY.'"


"That poor child," said the Story Girl.

"Well, all I hope is that strangers won't take her for one of the
family," remarked Felicity in a disgusted tone.

Aunt Olivia was married at five o'clock in the orchard under the late
apple tree. It was a pretty scene. The air was full of the perfume of
apple bloom, and the bees blundered foolishly and delightfully from one
blossom to another, half drunken with perfume. The old orchard was full
of smiling guests in wedding garments. Aunt Olivia was most beautiful
amid the frost of her bridal veil, and the Story Girl, in an unusually
long white dress, with her brown curls clubbed up behind, looked so tall
and grown-up that we hardly recognized her. After the ceremony--during
which Sara Ray cried all the time--there was a royal wedding supper, and
Sara Ray was permitted to eat her share of the feast with us.

"I'm glad I was stung by the wasps after all," she said delightedly.
"If I hadn't been ma would never have let me eat with you. She just got
tired explaining to people what was the matter with my face, and so
she was glad to get rid of me. I know I look awful, but, oh, wasn't the
bride a dream?"

We missed the Story Girl, who, of course, had to have her supper at
the bridal table; but we were a hilarious little crew and the girls had
nobly kept their promise to save tid-bits for us. By the time the last
table was cleared away Aunt Olivia and our new uncle were ready to go.
There was an orgy of tears and leavetakings, and then they drove away
into the odorous moonlight night. Dan and Peter pursued them down the
lane with a fiendish din of bells and pans, much to Felicity's wrath.
But Aunt Olivia and Uncle Robert took it in good part and waved their
hands back to us with peals of laughter.

"They're just that pleased with themselves that they wouldn't mind if
there was an earthquake," said Felix, grinning.

"It's been splendid and exciting, and everything went off well," sighed
Cecily, "but, oh dear, it's going to be so queer and lonesome without
Aunt Olivia. I just believe I'll cry all night."

"You're tired to death, that's what's the matter with you," said Dan,
returning. "You girls have worked like slaves today."

"Tomorrow will be even harder," said Felicity comfortingly. "Everything
will have to be cleaned up and put away."

Peg Bowen paid us a call the next day and was regaled with a feast of
fat things left over from the supper.

"Well, I've had all I can eat," she said, when she had finished and
brought out her pipe. "And that doesn't happen to me every day. There
ain't been as much marrying as there used to be, and half the time they
just sneak off to the minister, as if they were ashamed of it, and get
married without any wedding or supper. That ain't the King way, though.
And so Olivia's gone off at last. She weren't in any hurry but they tell
me she's done well. Time'll show."

"Why don't you get married yourself, Peg?" queried Uncle Roger
teasingly. We held our breath over his temerity.

"Because I'm not so easy to please as your wife will be," retorted Peg.

She departed in high good humour over her repartee. Meeting Sara Ray
on the doorstep she stopped and asked her what was the matter with her
face.

"Wasps," stammered Sara Ray, laconic from terror.

"Humph! And your hands?"

"Warts."

"I'll tell you what'll take them away. You get a pertater and go out
under the full moon, cut the pertater in two, rub your warts with one
half and say, 'One, two, three, warts, go away from me.' Then rub
them with the other half and say, 'One, two, three, four, warts, never
trouble me more.' Then bury the pertater and never tell a living soul
where you buried it. You won't have no more warts. Mind you bury the
pertater, though. If you don't, and anyone picks it up, she'll get your
warts."




CHAPTER XVIII. SARA RAY HELPS OUT


We all missed Aunt Olivia greatly; she had been so merry and
companionable, and had possessed such a knack of understanding small
fry. But youth quickly adapts itself to changed conditions; in a few
weeks it seemed as if the Story Girl had always been living at Uncle
Alec's, and as if Uncle Roger had always had a fat, jolly housekeeper
with a double chin and little, twinkling blue eyes. I don't think Aunt
Janet ever quite got over missing Aunt Olivia, or looked upon Mrs.
Hawkins as anything but a necessary evil; but life resumed its even
tenor on the King farm, broken only by the ripples of excitement over
the school concert and letters from Aunt Olivia describing her trip
through the land of Evangeline. We incorporated the letters in Our
Magazine under the heading "From Our Special Correspondent" and were
very proud of them.

At the end of June our school concert came off and was a great event
in our young lives. It was the first appearance of most of us on any
platform, and some of us were very nervous. We all had recitations,
except Dan, who had refused flatly to take any part and was consequently
care-free.

"I'm sure I shall die when I find myself up on that platform, facing
people," sighed Sara Ray, as we talked the affair over in Uncle
Stephen's Walk the night before the concert.

"I'm afraid I'll faint," was Cecily's more moderate foreboding.

"I'm not one single bit nervous," said Felicity complacently.

"I'm not nervous this time," said the Story Girl, "but the first time I
recited I was."

"My Aunt Jane," remarked Peter, "used to say that an old teacher of hers
told her that when she was going to recite or speak in public she must
just get it firmly into her mind that it was only a lot of cabbage heads
she had before her, and she wouldn't be nervous."

"One mightn't be nervous, but I don't think there would be much
inspiration in reciting to cabbage heads," said the Story Girl
decidedly. "I want to recite to PEOPLE, and see them looking interested
and thrilled."

"If I can only get through my piece without breaking down I don't care
whether I thrill people or not," said Sara Ray.

"I'm afraid I'll forget mine and get stuck," foreboded Felix. "Some of
you fellows be sure and prompt me if I do--and do it quick, so's I won't
get worse rattled."

"I know one thing," said Cecily resolutely, "and that is, I'm going
to curl my hair for to-morrow night. I've never curled it since Peter
almost died, but I simply must tomorrow night, for all the other girls
are going to have theirs in curls."

"The dew and heat will take all the curl out of yours and then you'll
look like a scarecrow," warned Felicity.

"No, I won't. I'm going to put my hair up in paper tonight and wet it
with a curling-fluid that Judy Pineau uses. Sara brought me up a bottle
of it. Judy says it is great stuff--your hair will keep in curl for
days, no matter how damp the weather is. I'll leave my hair in the
papers till tomorrow evening, and then I'll have beautiful curls."

"You'd better leave your hair alone," said Dan gruffly. "Smooth hair is
better than a lot of fly-away curls."

But Cecily was not to be persuaded. Curls she craved and curls she meant
to have.

"I'm thankful my warts have all gone, any-way," said Sara Ray.

"So they have," exclaimed Felicity. "Did you try Peg's recipe?"

"Yes. I didn't believe in it but I tried it. For the first few days
afterwards I kept watching my warts, but they didn't go away, and then
I gave up and forgot them. But one day last week I just happened to look
at my hands and there wasn't a wart to be seen. It was the most amazing
thing."

"And yet you'll say Peg Bowen isn't a witch," said Peter.

"Pshaw, it was just the potato juice," scoffed Dan.

"It was a dry old potato I had, and there wasn't much juice in it,"
said Sara Ray. "One hardly knows what to believe. But one thing is
certain--my warts are gone."

Cecily put her hair up in curl-papers that night, thoroughly soaked in
Judy Pineau's curling-fluid. It was a nasty job, for the fluid was very
sticky, but Cecily persevered and got it done. Then she went to bed with
a towel tied over her head to protect the pillow. She did not sleep
well and had uncanny dreams, but she came down to breakfast with an
expression of triumph. The Story Girl examined her head critically and
said,

"Cecily, if I were you I'd take those papers out this morning."

"Oh, no; if I do my hair will be straight again by night. I mean to
leave them in till the last minute."

"I wouldn't do that--I really wouldn't," persisted the Story Girl. "If
you do your hair will be too curly and all bushy and fuzzy."

Cecily finally yielded and went upstairs with the Story Girl. Presently
we heard a little shriek--then two little shrieks--then three. Then
Felicity came flying down and called her mother. Aunt Janet went up and
presently came down again with a grim mouth. She filled a large pan with
warm water and carried it upstairs. We dared ask her no questions, but
when Felicity came down to wash the dishes we bombarded her.

"What on earth is the matter with Cecily?" demanded Dan. "Is she sick?"

"No, she isn't. I warned her not to put her hair in curls but she
wouldn't listen to me. I guess she wishes she had now. When people
haven't natural curly hair they shouldn't try to make it curly. They get
punished if they do."

"Look here, Felicity, never mind all that. Just tell us what has
happened Sis."

"Well, this is what has happened her. That ninny of a Sara Ray brought
up a bottle of mucilage instead of Judy's curling-fluid, and Cecily put
her hair up with THAT. It's in an awful state."

"Good gracious!" exclaimed Dan. "Look here, will she ever get it out?"

"Goodness knows. She's got her head in soak now. Her hair is just matted
together hard as a board. That's what comes of vanity," said Felicity,
than whom no vainer girl existed.

Poor Cecily paid dearly enough for HER vanity. She spent a bad forenoon,
made no easier by her mother's severe rebukes. For an hour she "soaked"
her head; that is, she stood over a panful of warm water and kept
dipping her head in with tightly shut eyes. Finally her hair softened
sufficiently to be disentangled from the curl papers; and then Aunt
Janet subjected it to a merciless shampoo. Eventually they got all the
mucilage washed out of it and Cecily spent the remainder of the forenoon
sitting before the open oven door in the hot kitchen drying her ill-used
tresses. She felt very down-hearted; her hair was of that order which,
glossy and smooth normally, is dry and harsh and lustreless for several
days after being shampooed.

"I'll look like a fright tonight," said the poor child to me with
trembling voice. "The ends will be sticking out all over my head."

"Sara Ray is a perfect idiot," I said wrathfully

"Oh, don't be hard on poor Sara. She didn't mean to bring me mucilage.
It's really all my own fault, I know. I made a solemn vow when Peter was
dying that I would never curl my hair again, and I should have kept it.
It isn't right to break solemn vows. But my hair will look like dried
hay tonight."

Poor Sara Ray was quite overwhelmed when she came up and found what
she had done. Felicity was very hard on her, and Aunt Janet was coldly
disapproving, but sweet Cecily forgave her unreservedly, and they walked
to the school that night with their arms about each other's waists as
usual.

The school-room was crowded with friends and neighbours. Mr. Perkins was
flying about, getting things into readiness, and Miss Reade, who was
the organist of the evening, was sitting on the platform, looking her
sweetest and prettiest. She wore a delightful white lace hat with a
fetching little wreath of tiny forget-me-nots around the brim, a white
muslin dress with sprays of blue violets scattered over it, and a black
lace scarf.

"Doesn't she look angelic?" said Cecily rapturously.

"Mind you," said Sara Ray, "the Awkward Man is here--in the corner
behind the door. I never remember seeing him at a concert before."

"I suppose he came to hear the Story Girl recite," said Felicity. "He is
such a friend of hers."

The concert went off very well. Dialogues, choruses and recitations
followed each other in rapid succession. Felix got through his without
"getting stuck," and Peter did excellently, though he stuffed his hands
in his trousers pockets--a habit of which Mr. Perkins had vainly tried
to break him. Peter's recitation was one greatly in vogue at that time,
beginning,


     "My name is Norval; on the Grampian hills
      My father feeds his flocks."


At our first practice Peter had started gaily in, rushing through the
first line with no thought whatever of punctuation--"My name is Norval
on the Grampian Hills."

"Stop, stop, Peter," quoth Mr. Perkins, sarcastically, "your name might
be Norval if you were never on the Grampian Hills. There's a semi-colon
in that line, I wish you to remember."

Peter did remember it. Cecily neither fainted nor failed when it came
her turn. She recited her little piece very well, though somewhat
mechanically. I think she really did much better than if she had had her
desired curls. The miserable conviction that her hair, alone among
that glossy-tressed bevy, was looking badly, quite blotted out all
nervousness and self-consciousness from her mind. Her hair apart, she
looked very pretty. The prevailing excitement had made bright her eye
and flushed her cheeks rosily--too rosily, perhaps. I heard a Carlisle
woman behind me whisper that Cecily King looked consumptive, just like
her Aunt Felicity; and I hated her fiercely for it.

Sara Ray also managed to get through respectably, although she was
pitiably nervous. Her bow was naught but a short nod--"as if her head
worked on wires," whispered Felicity uncharitably--and the wave of her
lily-white hand more nearly resembled an agonized jerk than a wave. We
all felt relieved when she finished. She was, in a sense, one of "our
crowd," and we had been afraid she would disgrace us by breaking down.

Felicity followed her and recited her selection without haste, without
rest, and absolutely without any expression whatever. But what mattered
it how she recited? To look at her was sufficient. What with her
splendid fleece of golden curls, her great, brilliant blue eyes, her
exquisitely tinted face, her dimpled hands and arms, every member of the
audience must have felt it was worth the ten cents he had paid merely to
see her.

The Story Girl followed. An expectant silence fell over the room, and
Mr. Perkins' face lost the look of tense anxiety it had worn all the
evening. Here was a performer who could be depended on. No need to
fear stage fright or forgetfulness on her part. The Story Girl was not
looking her best that night. White never became her, and her face
was pale, though her eyes were splendid. But nobody thought about her
appearance when the power and magic of her voice caught and held her
listeners spellbound.

Her recitation was an old one, figuring in one of the School Readers,
and we scholars all knew it off by heart. Sara Ray alone had not heard
the Story Girl recite it. The latter had not been drilled at practices
as had the other pupils, Mr. Perkins choosing not to waste time teaching
her what she already knew far better than he did. The only time she had
recited it had been at the "dress rehearsal" two nights before, at which
Sara Ray had not been present.

In the poem a Florentine lady of old time, wedded to a cold and cruel
husband, had died, or was supposed to have died, and had been carried to
"the rich, the beautiful, the dreadful tomb" of her proud family. In
the night she wakened from her trance and made her escape. Chilled and
terrified, she had made her way to her husband's door, only to be driven
away brutally as a restless ghost by the horror-stricken inmates. A
similar reception awaited her at her father's. Then she had wandered
blindly through the streets of Florence until she had fallen exhausted
at the door of the lover of her girlhood. He, unafraid, had taken her
in and cared for her. On the morrow, the husband and father, having
discovered the empty tomb, came to claim her. She refused to return to
them and the case was carried to the court of law. The verdict given was
that a woman who had been "to burial borne" and left for dead, who had
been driven from her husband's door and from her childhood home, "must
be adjudged as dead in law and fact," was no more daughter or wife, but
was set free to form what new ties she would. The climax of the whole
selection came in the line,

"The court pronounces the defendant--DEAD!" and the Story Girl was wont
to render it with such dramatic intensity and power that the veriest
dullard among her listeners could not have missed its force and
significance.

She swept along through the poem royally, playing on the emotions of her
audience as she had so often played on ours in the old orchard. Pity,
terror, indignation, suspense, possessed her hearers in turn. In
the court scene she surpassed herself. She was, in very truth, the
Florentine judge, stern, stately, impassive. Her voice dropped into the
solemnity of the all-important line,

"'The court pronounces the defendant--'"

She paused for a breathless moment, the better to bring out the tragic
import of the last word.

"DEAD," piped up Sara Ray in her shrill, plaintive little voice.

The effect, to use a hackneyed but convenient phrase, can better be
imagined than described. Instead of the sigh of relieved tension that
should have swept over the audience at the conclusion of the line,
a burst of laughter greeted it. The Story Girl's performance was
completely spoiled. She dealt the luckless Sara a glance that would have
slain her on the spot could glances kill, stumbled lamely and impotently
through the few remaining lines of her recitation, and fled with crimson
cheeks to hide her mortification in the little corner that had been
curtained off for a dressing-room. Mr. Perkins looked things not lawful
to be uttered, and the audience tittered at intervals for the rest of
the performance.

Sara Ray alone remained serenely satisfied until the close of the
concert, when we surrounded her with a whirlwind of reproaches.

"Why," she stammered aghast, "what did I do? I--I thought she was stuck
and that I ought to prompt her quick."

"You little fool, she just paused for effect," cried Felicity angrily.
Felicity might be rather jealous of the Story Girl's gift, but she
was furious at beholding "one of our family" made ridiculous in such a
fashion. "You have less sense than anyone I ever heard of, Sara Ray."

Poor Sara dissolved in tears.

"I didn't know. I thought she was stuck," she wailed again.

She cried all the way home, but we did not try to comfort her. We felt
quite out of patience with her. Even Cecily was seriously annoyed. This
second blunder of Sara's was too much even for her loyalty. We saw her
turn in at her own gate and go sobbing up her lane with no relenting.

The Story Girl was home before us, having fled from the schoolhouse as
soon as the programme was over. We tried to sympathize with her but she
would not be sympathized with.

"Please don't ever mention it to me again," she said, with compressed
lips. "I never want to be reminded of it. Oh, that little IDIOT!"

"She spoiled Peter's sermon last summer and now she's spoiled your
recitation," said Felicity. "I think it's time we gave up associating
with Sara Ray."

"Oh, don't be quite so hard on her," pleaded Cecily. "Think of the life
the poor child has to live at home. I know she'll cry all night."

"Oh, let's go to bed," growled Dan. "I'm good and ready for it. I've had
enough of school concerts."




CHAPTER XIX. BY WAY OF THE STARS


But for two of us the adventures of the night were not yet over. Silence
settled down over the old house--the eerie, whisperful, creeping silence
of night. Felix and Dan were already sound asleep; I was drifting near
the coast o' dreams when I was aroused by a light tap on the door.

"Bev, are you asleep?" came in the Story Girl's whisper.

"No, what is it?"

"S-s-h. Get up and dress and come out. I want you."

With a good deal of curiosity and some misgiving I obeyed. What was in
the wind now? Outside in the hall I found the Story Girl, with a candle
in her hand, and her hat and jacket.

"Where are you going?" I whispered in amazement.

"Hush. I've got to go to the school and you must come with me. I left my
coral necklace there. The clasp came loose and I was so afraid I'd lose
it that I took it off and put it in the bookcase. I was feeling so upset
when the concert was over that I forgot all about it."

The coral necklace was a very handsome one which had belonged to the
Story Girl's mother. She had never been permitted to wear it before, and
it had only been by dint of much coaxing that she had induced Aunt Janet
to let her wear it to the concert.

"But there's no sense in going for it in the dead of night," I objected.
"It will be quite safe. You can go for it in the morning."

"Lizzie Paxton and her daughter are going to clean the school tomorrow,
and I heard Lizzie say tonight she meant to be at it by five o'clock to
get through before the heat of the day. You know perfectly well what
Liz Paxton's reputation is. If she finds that necklace I'll never see it
again. Besides, if I wait till the morning, Aunt Janet may find out that
I left it there and she'd never let me wear it again. No, I'm going for
it now. If you're afraid," added the Story Girl with delicate scorn, "of
course you needn't come."

Afraid! I'd show her!

"Come on," I said.

We slipped out of the house noiselessly and found ourselves in the
unutterable solemnity and strangeness of a dark night. It was a new
experience, and our hearts thrilled and our nerves tingled to the charm
of it. Never had we been abroad before at such an hour. The world around
us was not the world of daylight. 'Twas an alien place, full of weird,
evasive enchantment and magicry.

Only in the country can one become truly acquainted with the night.
There it has the solemn calm of the infinite. The dim wide fields lie in
silence, wrapped in the holy mystery of darkness. A wind, loosened from
wild places far away, steals out to blow over dewy, star-lit, immemorial
hills. The air in the pastures is sweet with the hush of dreams, and one
may rest here like a child on its mother's breast.

"Isn't it wonderful?" breathed the Story Girl as we went down the long
hill. "Do you know, I can forgive Sara Ray now. I thought tonight I
never could--but now it doesn't matter any more. I can even see how
funny it was. Oh, wasn't it funny? 'DEAD' in that squeaky little voice
of Sara's! I'll just behave to her tomorrow as if nothing had happened.
It seems so long ago now, here in the night."

Neither of us ever forgot the subtle delight of that stolen walk. A
spell of glamour was over us. The breezes whispered strange secrets of
elf-haunted glens, and the hollows where the ferns grew were brimmed
with mystery and romance. Ghostlike scents crept out of the meadows
to meet us, and the fir wood before we came to the church was a living
sweetness of Junebells growing in abundance.

Junebells have another and more scientific name, of course. But who
could desire a better name than Junebells? They are so perfect in their
way that they seem to epitomize the very scent and charm of the forest,
as if the old wood's daintiest thoughts had materialized in blossom;
and not all the roses by Bendameer's stream are as fragrant as a shallow
sheet of Junebells under the boughs of fir.

There were fireflies abroad that night, too, increasing the gramarye of
it. There is certainly something a little supernatural about fireflies.
Nobody pretends to understand them. They are akin to the tribes of
fairy, survivals of the elder time when the woods and hills swarmed with
the little green folk. It is still very easy to believe in fairies when
you see those goblin lanterns glimmering among the fir tassels.

"Isn't it beautiful?" said the Story Girl in rapture. "I wouldn't have
missed it for anything. I'm glad I left my necklace. And I am glad you
are with me, Bev. The others wouldn't understand so well. I like you
because I don't have to talk to you all the time. It's so nice to walk
with someone you don't have to talk to. Here is the graveyard. Are you
frightened to pass it, Bev?"

"No, I don't think I'm frightened," I answered slowly, "but I have a
queer feeling."

"So have I. But it isn't fear. I don't know what it is. I feel as if
something was reaching out of the graveyard to hold me--something that
wanted life--I don't like it--let's hurry. But isn't it strange to think
of all the dead people in there who were once alive like you and me. I
don't feel as if I could EVER die. Do you?"

"No, but everybody must. Of course we go on living afterwards, just the
same. Don't let's talk of such things here," I said hurriedly.

When we reached the school I contrived to open a window. We scrambled
in, lighted a lamp and found the missing necklace. The Story Girl stood
on the platform and gave an imitation of the catastrophe of the evening
that made me shout with laughter. We prowled around for sheer delight
over being there at an unearthly hour when everybody supposed we were
sound asleep in our beds. It was with regret that we left, and we walked
home as slowly as we could to prolong the adventure.

"Let's never tell anyone," said the Story Girl, as we reached home.
"Let's just have it as a secret between us for ever and ever--something
that nobody else knows a thing about but you and me."

"We'd better keep it a secret from Aunt Janet anyhow," I whispered,
laughing. "She'd think we were both crazy."

"It's real jolly to be crazy once in a while," said the Story Girl.




CHAPTER XX. EXTRACTS FROM "OUR MAGAZINE"


EDITORIAL

As will be seen there is no Honour Roll in this number. Even Felicity
has thought all the beautiful thoughts that can be thought and
cannot think any more. Peter has never got drunk but, under existing
circumstances, that is not greatly to his credit. As for our written
resolutions they have silently disappeared from our chamber walls and
the place that once knew them knows them no more for ever. (PETER,
PERPLEXEDLY: "Seems to me I've heard something like that before.") It is
very sad but we will all make some new resolutions next year and maybe
it will be easier to keep those.


THE STORY OF THE LOCKET THAT WAS BAKED

This was a story my Aunt Jane told me about her granma when she was a
little girl. Its funny to think of baking a locket, but it wasn't to
eat. She was my great granma but Ill call her granma for short. It
happened when she was ten years old. Of course she wasent anybodys
granma then. Her father and mother and her were living in a new
settlement called Brinsley. Their nearest naybor was a mile away. One
day her Aunt Hannah from Charlottetown came and wanted her ma to go
visiting with her. At first granma's ma thought she couldent go because
it was baking day and granma's pa was away. But granma wasent afraid to
stay alone and she knew how to bake the bread so she made her ma go
and her Aunt Hannah took off the handsome gold locket and chain she was
waring round her neck and hung it on granmas and told her she could ware
it all day. Granma was awful pleased for she had never had any jewelry.
She did all the chores and then was needing the loaves when she looked
up and saw a tramp coming in and he was an awful villenus looking tramp.
He dident even pass the time of day but just set down on a chair. Poor
granma was awful fritened and she turned her back on him and went on
needing the loaf cold and trembling--that is, granma was trembling not
the loaf. She was worried about the locket. She didn't know how she
could hide it for to get anywhere she would have to turn round and pass
him.

All of a suddent she thought she would hide it in the bread. She put her
hand up and pulled it hard and quick and broke the fastening and needed
it right into the loaf. Then she put the loaf in the pan and set it in
the oven.

The tramp hadent seen her do it and then he asked for something to eat.
Granma got him up a meal and when hed et it he began prowling about the
kitchen looking into everything and opening the cubbord doors. Then he
went into granma's mas room and turned the buro drawers and trunk inside
out and threw the things in them all about. All he found was a purse
with a dollar in it and he swore about it and took it and went away.
When granma was sure he was really gone she broke down and cried. She
forgot all about the bread and it burned as black as coal. When she
smelled it burning granma run and pulled it out. She was awful scared
the locket was spoiled but she sawed open the loaf and it was there safe
and sound. When her Aunt Hannah came back she said granma deserved the
locket because she had saved it so clever and she gave it to her and
grandma always wore it and was very proud of it. And granma used to say
that was the only loaf of bread she ever spoiled in her life.

                                       PETER CRAIG.


(FELICITY: "Those stories are all very well but they are only true
stories. It's easy enough to write true stories. I thought Peter was
appointed fiction editor, but he has never written any fiction since the
paper started. That's not MY idea of a fiction editor. He ought to make
up stories out of his own head." PETER, SPUNKILY: "I can do it, too,
and I will next time. And it ain't easier to write true stories. It's
harder, 'cause you have to stick to facts." FELICITY: "I don't believe
you could make up a story." PETER: "I'll show you!")


MY MOST EXCITING ADVENTURE

It's my turn to write it but I'm SO NERVOUS. My worst adventure happened
TWO YEARS AGO. It was an awful one. I had a striped ribbon, striped
brown and yellow and I LOST IT. I was very sorry for it was a handsome
ribbon and all the girls in school were jealous of it. (FELICITY: "I
wasn't. I didn't think it one bit pretty." CECILY: "Hush!") I hunted
everywhere but I couldn't find it. Next day was Sunday and I was running
into the house by the front door and I saw SOMETHING LYING ON THE STEP
and I thought it was my ribbon and I made a grab at it as I passed. But,
oh, it was A SNAKE! Oh, I can never describe how I felt when I felt that
awful thing WRIGGLING IN MY HAND. I let it go and SCREAMED AND SCREAMED,
and ma was cross at me for yelling on Sunday and made me read seven
chapters in the Bible but I didn't mind that much after what I had come
through. I would rather DIE than have SUCH AN EXPERIENCE again.

                                         SARA RAY.


         TO FELICITY ON HER BERTHDAY

         Oh maiden fair with golden hair
         And brow of purest white,
         Id fight for you I'd die for you
         Let me be your faithful knite.

         This is your berthday blessed day
         You are thirteen years old today
         May you be happy and fair as you are now
         Until your hair is gray.

         I gaze into your shining eyes,
         They are so blue and bright.
         Id fight for you Id die for you
         Let me be your faithful knite.

                                     A FRIEND.


(DAN: "Great snakes, who got that up? I'll bet it was Peter." FELICITY,
WITH DIGNITY: "Well, it's more than YOU could do. YOU couldn't write
poetry to save your life." PETER, ASIDE TO BEVERLEY: "She seems quite
pleased. I'm glad I wrote it, but it was awful hard work.")


PERSONALS

Patrick Grayfur, Esq., caused his friends great anxiety recently by a
prolonged absence from home. When found he was very thin but is now as
fat and conceited as ever.

On Wednesday, June 20th, Miss Olivia King was united in the bonds of
holy matrimony to Dr. Robert Seton of Halifax. Miss Sara Stanley was
bridesmaid, and Mr. Andrew Seton attended the groom. The young couple
received many handsome presents. Rev. Mr. Marwood tied the nuptial knot.
After the ceremony a substantial repast was served in Mrs. Alex King's
well-known style and the happy couple left for their new home in
Nova Scotia. Their many friends join in wishing them a very happy and
prosperous journey through life.


        A precious one from us is gone,
        A voice we loved is stilled.
        A place is vacant in our home
        That never can be filled.


(THE STORY GIRL: "Goodness, that sounds as if somebody had died. I've
seen that verse on a tombstone. WHO wrote that notice?" FELICITY,
WHO WROTE IT: "I think it is just as appropriate to a wedding as to a
funeral!")

Our school concert came off on the evening of June 29th and was a great
success. We made ten dollars for the library.

We regret to chronicle that Miss Sara Ray met with a misfortune while
taking some violent exercise with a wasps' nest recently. The moral is
that it is better not to monkey with a wasps' nest, new or old.

Mrs. C. B. Hawkins of Baywater is keeping house for Uncle Roger. She
is a very large woman. Uncle Roger says he has to spend too much time
walking round her, but otherwise she is an excellent housekeeper.

It is reported that the school is haunted. A mysterious light was seen
there at two o'clock one night recently.

(THE STORY GIRL AND I EXCHANGE KNOWING SMILES BEHIND THE OTHERS' BACKS.)

Dan and Felicity had a fight last Tuesday--not with fists but with
tongues. Dan came off best--as usual. (FELICITY LAUGHS SARCASTICALLY.)

Mr. Newton Craig of Markdale returned home recently after a somewhat
prolonged visit in foreign parts. We are glad to welcome Mr. Craig back
to our midst.

Billy Robinson was hurt last week. A cow kicked him. I suppose it is
wicked of us to feel glad but we all do feel glad because of the way he
cheated us with the magic seed last summer.

On April 1st Uncle Roger sent Mr. Peter Craig to the manse to borrow the
biography of Adam's grandfather. Mr. Marwood told Peter he didn't think
Adam had any grandfather and advised him to go home and look at the
almanac. (PETER, SOURLY: "Your Uncle Roger thought he was pretty smart."
FELICITY, SEVERELY: "Uncle Roger IS smart. It was so easy to fool you.")

A pair of blue birds have built a nest in a hole in the sides of the
well, just under the ferns. We can see the eggs when we look down. They
are so cunning.

Felix sat down on a tack one day in May. Felix thinks house-cleaning is
great foolishness.


ADS.

LOST--STOLEN--OR STRAYED--A HEART. Finder will be rewarded by returning
same to Cyrus E. Brisk, Desk 7, Carlisle School.

LOST OR STOLEN. A piece of brown hair about three inches long and one
inch thick. Finder will kindly return to Miss Cecily King, Desk 15,
Carlisle School.

(CECILY: "Cyrus keeps my hair in his Bible for a bookmark, so Flossie
tells me. He says he means to keep it always for a remembrance though
he has given up hope." DAN: "I'll steal it out of his Bible in Sunday
School." CECILY, BLUSHING: "Oh, let him keep it if it is any comfort to
him. Besides, it isn't right to steal." DAN: "He stole it." CECILY: "But
Mr. Marwood says two wrongs never make a right.")


HOUSEHOLD DEPARTMENT

Aunt Olivia's wedding cake was said to be the best one of its kind ever
tasted in Carlisle. Me and mother made it.

ANXIOUS INQUIRER:--It is not advisable to curl your hair with mucilage
if you can get anything else. Quince juice is better. (CECILY, BITTERLY:
"I suppose I'll never hear the last of that mucilage." DAN: "Ask her who
used tooth-powder to raise biscuits?")

We had rhubarb pies for the first time this spring last week. They were
fine but hard on the cream.

                                     FELICITY KING.


ETIQUETTE DEPARTMENT

PATIENT SUFFERER:--What will I do when a young man steals a lock of my
hair? Ans.:--Grow some more.

No, F-l-x, a little caterpillar is not called a kittenpillar. (FELIX,
ENRAGED: "I never asked that! Dan just makes that etiquette column
up from beginning to end!" FELICITY: "I don't see what that kind of a
question has to do with etiquette anyhow.")

Yes, P-t-r, it is quite proper to treat a lady friend to ice cream twice
if you can afford it.

No, F-l-c-t-y, it is not ladylike to chew tobacco. Better stick to
spruce gum.

                                          DAN KING.


FASHION NOTES

Frilled muslin aprons will be much worn this summer. It is no longer
fashionable to trim them with knitted lace. One pocket is considered
smart.

Clam-shells are fashionable keepsakes. You write your name and the date
inside one and your friend writes hers in the other and you exchange.

                                       CECILY KING.


FUNNY PARAGRAPHS

MR. PERKINS:--"Peter, name the large islands of the world."

PETER:--"The Island, the British Isles and Australia." (PETER,
DEFIANTLY: "Well, Mr. Perkins said he guessed I was right, so you
needn't laugh.")

This is a true joke and really happened. It's about Mr. Samuel Clask
again. He was once leading a prayer meeting and he looked through the
window and saw the constable driving up and guessed he was after him
because he was always in debt. So in a great hurry he called on Brother
Casey to lead in prayer and while Brother Casey was praying with his
eyes shut and everybody else had their heads bowed Mr. Clask got out of
the window and got away before the constable got in because he didn't
like to come in till the prayer was finished.

Uncle Roger says it was a smart trick on Mr. Clask's part, but I don't
think there was much religion about it.

                                        FELIX KING.




CHAPTER XXI. PEG BOWEN COMES TO CHURCH


When those of us who are still left of that band of children who played
long years ago in the old orchard and walked the golden road together
in joyous companionship, foregather now and again in our busy lives and
talk over the events of those many merry moons--there are some of our
adventures that gleam out more vividly in memory than the others, and
are oftener discussed. The time we bought God's picture from Jerry
Cowan--the time Dan ate the poison berries--the time we heard the
ghostly bell ring--the bewitchment of Paddy--the visit of the Governor's
wife--and the night we were lost in the storm--all awaken reminiscent
jest and laughter; but none more than the recollection of the Sunday
Peg Bowen came to church and sat in our pew. Though goodness knows, as
Felicity would say, we did not think it any matter for laughter at the
time--far from it.

It was one Sunday evening in July. Uncle Alec and Aunt Janet, having
been out to the morning service, did not attend in the evening, and we
small fry walked together down the long hill road, wearing Sunday attire
and trying, more or less successfully, to wear Sunday faces also. Those
walks to church, through the golden completeness of the summer evenings,
were always very pleasant to us, and we never hurried, though, on the
other hand, we were very careful not to be late.

This particular evening was particularly beautiful. It was cool after a
hot day, and wheat fields all about us were ripening to their harvestry.
The wind gossiped with the grasses along our way, and over them the
buttercups danced, goldenly-glad. Waves of sinuous shadow went over the
ripe hayfields, and plundering bees sang a freebooting lilt in wayside
gardens.

"The world is so lovely tonight," said the Story Girl. "I just hate the
thought of going into the church and shutting all the sunlight and music
outside. I wish we could have the service outside in summer."

"I don't think that would be very religious," said Felicity.

"I'd feel ever so much more religious outside than in," retorted the
Story Girl.

"If the service was outside we'd have to sit in the graveyard and that
wouldn't be very cheerful," said Felix.

"Besides, the music isn't shut out," added Felicity. "The choir is
inside."

"'Music has charms to soothe a savage breast,'" quoted Peter, who was
getting into the habit of adorning his conversation with similar gems.
"That's in one of Shakespeare's plays. I'm reading them now, since I got
through with the Bible. They're great."

"I don't see when you get time to read them," said Felicity.

"Oh, I read them Sunday afternoons when I'm home."

"I don't believe they're fit to read on Sundays," exclaimed Felicity.
"Mother says Valeria Montague's stories ain't."

"But Shakespeare's different from Valeria," protested Peter.

"I don't see in what way. He wrote a lot of things that weren't true,
just like Valeria, and he wrote swear words too. Valeria never does
that. Her characters all talk in a very refined fashion."

"Well, I always skip the swear words," said Peter. "And Mr. Marwood said
once that the Bible and Shakespeare would furnish any library well. So
you see he put them together, but I'm sure that he would never say that
the Bible and Valeria would make a library."

"Well, all I know is, I shall never read Shakespeare on Sunday," said
Felicity loftily.

"I wonder what kind of a preacher young Mr. Davidson is," speculated
Cecily.

"Well, we'll know when we hear him tonight," said the Story Girl. "He
ought to be good, for his uncle before him was a fine preacher, though a
very absent-minded man. But Uncle Roger says the supply in Mr. Marwood's
vacation never amounts to much. I know an awfully funny story about old
Mr. Davidson. He used to be the minister in Baywater, you know, and he
had a large family and his children were very mischievous. One day his
wife was ironing and she ironed a great big nightcap with a frill round
it. One of the children took it when she wasn't looking and hid it
in his father's best beaver hat--the one he wore on Sundays. When Mr.
Davidson went to church next Sunday he put the hat on without ever
looking into the crown. He walked to church in a brown study and at the
door he took off his hat. The nightcap just slipped down on his head, as
if it had been put on, and the frill stood out around his face and the
string hung down his back. But he never noticed it, because his thoughts
were far away, and he walked up the church aisle and into the pulpit,
like that. One of his elders had to tiptoe up and tell him what he
had on his head. He plucked it off in a dazed fashion, held it up, and
looked at it. 'Bless me, it is Sally's nightcap!' he exclaimed mildly.
'I do not know how I could have got it on.' Then he just stuffed it into
his pocket calmly and went on with the service, and the long strings of
the nightcap hung down out of his pocket all the time."

"It seems to me," said Peter, amid the laughter with which we greeted
the tale, "that a funny story is funnier when it is about a minister
than it is about any other man. I wonder why."

"Sometimes I don't think it is right to tell funny stories about
ministers," said Felicity. "It certainly isn't respectful."

"A good story is a good story--no matter who it's about," said the Story
Girl with ungrammatical relish.

There was as yet no one in the church when we reached it, so we took our
accustomed ramble through the graveyard surrounding it. The Story Girl
had brought flowers for her mother's grave as usual, and while she
arranged them on it the rest of us read for the hundredth time the
epitaph on Great-Grandfather King's tombstone, which had been composed
by Great-Grandmother King. That epitaph was quite famous among the
little family traditions that entwine every household with mingled mirth
and sorrow, smiles and tears. It had a perennial fascination for us
and we read it over every Sunday. Cut deeply in the upright slab of red
Island sandstone, the epitaph ran as follows:--


SWEET DEPARTED SPIRIT

     Do receive the vows a grateful widow pays,
     Each future day and night shall hear her speak her Isaac's praise.
     Though thy beloved form must in the grave decay
     Yet from her heart thy memory no time, no change shall steal away.
     Do thou from mansions of eternal bliss
     Remember thy distressed relict.
     Look on her with an angel's love--
     Soothe her sad life and cheer her end
     Through this world's dangers and its griefs.
     Then meet her with thy well-known smiles and welcome
     At the last great day.


"Well, I can't make out what the old lady was driving at," said Dan.

"That's a nice way to speak of your great-grandmother," said Felicity
severely.

"How does The Family Guide say you ought to speak of your great-grandma,
sweet one?" asked Dan.

"There is one thing about it that puzzles me," remarked Cecily. "She
calls herself a GRATEFUL widow. Now, what was she grateful for?"

"Because she was rid of him at last," said graceless Dan.

"Oh, it couldn't have been that," protested Cecily seriously. "I've
always heard that Great-Grandfather and Great-Grandmother were very much
attached to each other."

"Maybe, then, it means she was grateful that she'd had him as long as
she did," suggested Peter.

"She was grateful to him because he had been so kind to her in life, I
think," said Felicity.

"What is a 'distressed relict'?" asked Felix.

"'Relict' is a word I hate," said the Story Girl. "It sounds so much
like relic. Relict means just the same as widow, only a man can be a
relict, too."

"Great-Grandmother seemed to run short of rhymes at the last of the
epitaph," commented Dan.

"Finding rhymes isn't as easy as you might think," avowed Peter, out of
his own experience.

"I think Grandmother King intended the last of the epitaph to be in
blank verse," said Felicity with dignity.

There was still only a sprinkling of people in the church when we went
in and took our places in the old-fashioned, square King pew. We had
just got comfortably settled when Felicity said in an agitated whisper,
"Here is Peg Bowen!"

We all stared at Peg, who was pacing composedly up the aisle. We might
be excused for so doing, for seldom were the decorous aisles of Carlisle
church invaded by such a figure. Peg was dressed in her usual short
drugget skirt, rather worn and frayed around the bottom, and a waist
of brilliant turkey red calico. She wore no hat, and her grizzled black
hair streamed in elf locks over her shoulders. Face, arms and feet
were bare--and face, arms and feet were liberally powdered with
FLOUR. Certainly no one who saw Peg that night could ever forget the
apparition.

Peg's black eyes, in which shone a more than usually wild and fitful
light, roved scrutinizingly over the church, then settled on our pew.

"She's coming here," whispered Felicity in horror. "Can't we spread out
and make her think the pew is full?"

But the manoeuvre was too late. The only result was that Felicity and
the Story Girl in moving over left a vacant space between them and Peg
promptly plumped down in it.

"Well, I'm here," she remarked aloud. "I did say once I'd never darken
the door of Carlisle church again, but what that boy there"--nodding
at Peter--"said last winter set me thinking, and I concluded maybe I'd
better come once in a while, to be on the safe side."

Those poor girls were in an agony. Everybody in the church was looking
at our pew and smiling. We all felt that we were terribly disgraced; but
we could do nothing. Peg was enjoying herself hugely, beyond all doubt.
From where she sat she could see the whole church, including pulpit and
gallery, and her black eyes darted over it with restless glances.

"Bless me, there's Sam Kinnaird," she exclaimed, still aloud. "He's
the man that dunned Jacob Marr for four cents on the church steps one
Sunday. I heard him. 'I think, Jacob, you owe me four cents on that cow
you bought last fall. Rec'llect you couldn't make the change?' Well, you
know, 'twould a-made a cat laugh. The Kinnairds were all mighty close, I
can tell you. That's how they got rich."

What Sam Kinnaird felt or thought during this speech, which everyone in
the church must have heard, I know not. Gossip had it that he changed
colour. We wretched occupants of the King pew were concerned only with
our own outraged feelings.

"And there's Melita Ross," went on Peg. "She's got the same bonnet on
she had last time I was in Carlisle church six years ago. Some folks has
the knack of making things last. But look at the style Mrs. Elmer Brewer
wears, will yez? Yez wouldn't think her mother died in the poor-house,
would yez, now?"

Poor Mrs. Brewer! From the tip of her smart kid shoes to the dainty
cluster of ostrich tips in her bonnet--she was most immaculately and
handsomely arrayed; but I venture to think she could have taken
small pleasure in her fashionable attire that evening. Some of the
unregenerate, including Dan, were shaking with suppressed laughter, but
most of the people looked as if they were afraid to smile, lest their
turn should come next.

"There's old Stephen Grant coming in," exclaimed Peg viciously, shaking
her floury fist at him, "and looking as if butter wouldn't melt in his
mouth. He may be an elder, but he's a scoundrel just the same. He set
fire to his house to get the insurance and then blamed ME for doing it.
But I got even with him for it. Oh, yes! He knows that, and so do I! He,
he!"

Peg chuckled quite fiendishly and Stephen Grant tried to look as if
nothing had been said.

"Oh, will the minister never come?" moaned Felicity in my ear. "Surely
she'll have to stop then."

But the minister did not come and Peg had no intention of stopping.

"There's Maria Dean." she resumed. "I haven't seen Maria for years.
I never call there for she never seems to have anything to eat in the
house. She was a Clayton and the Claytons never could cook. Maria
sorter looks as if she'd shrunk in the wash, now, don't she? And there's
Douglas Nicholson. His brother put rat poison in the family pancakes.
Nice little trick that, wasn't it? They say it was by mistake. I hope it
WAS a mistake. His wife is all rigged out in silk. Yez wouldn't think
to look at her she was married in cotton--and mighty thankful to get
married in anything, it's my opinion. There's Timothy Patterson. He's
the meanest man alive--meaner'n Sam Kinnaird even. Timothy pays his
children five cents apiece to go without their suppers, and then steals
the cents out of their pockets after they've gone to bed. It's a fact.
And when his old father died he wouldn't let his wife put his best shirt
on him. He said his second best was plenty good to be buried in. That's
another fact."

"I can't stand much more of this," wailed Felicity.

"See here, Miss Bowen, you really oughtn't to talk like that about
people," expostulated Peter in a low tone, goaded thereto, despite his
awe of Peg, by Felicity's anguish.

"Bless you, boy," said Peg good-humouredly, "the only difference between
me and other folks is that I say these things out loud and they just
think them. If I told yez all the things I know about the people in this
congregation you'd be amazed. Have a peppermint?"

To our horror Peg produced a handful of peppermint lozenges from the
pocket of her skirt and offered us one each. We did not dare refuse but
we each held our lozenge very gingerly in our hands.

"Eat them," commanded Peg rather fiercely.

"Mother doesn't allow us to eat candy in church," faltered Felicity.

"Well, I've seen just as fine ladies as your ma give their children
lozenges in church," said Peg loftily. She put a peppermint in her own
mouth and sucked it with gusto. We were relieved, for she did not talk
during the process; but our relief was of short duration. A bevy of
three very smartly dressed young ladies, sweeping past our pew, started
Peg off again.

"Yez needn't be so stuck up," she said, loudly and derisively. "Yez was
all of yez rocked in a flour barrel. And there's old Henry Frewen, still
above ground. I called my parrot after him because their noses were
exactly alike. Look at Caroline Marr, will yez? That's a woman who'd
like pretty well to get married, And there's Alexander Marr. He's a real
Christian, anyhow, and so's his dog. I can always size up what a man's
religion amounts to by the kind of dog he keeps. Alexander Marr is a
good man."

It was a relief to hear Peg speak well of somebody; but that was the
only exception she made.

"Look at Dave Fraser strutting in," she went on. "That man has thanked
God so often that he isn't like other people that it's come to be true.
He isn't! And there's Susan Frewen. She's jealous of everybody. She's
even jealous of Old Man Rogers because he's buried in the best spot in
the graveyard. Seth Erskine has the same look he was born with. They say
the Lord made everybody but I believe the devil made all the Erskines."

"She's getting worse all the time. What WILL she say next?" whispered
poor Felicity.

But her martyrdom was over at last. The minister appeared in the pulpit
and Peg subsided into silence. She folded her bare, floury arms over her
breast and fastened her black eyes on the young preacher. Her behaviour
for the next half-hour was decorum itself, save that when the minister
prayed that we might all be charitable in judgment Peg ejaculated "Amen"
several times, loudly and forcibly, somewhat to the discomfiture of the
Young man, to whom Peg was a stranger. He opened his eyes, glanced at
our pew in a startled way, then collected himself and went on.

Peg listened to the sermon, silently and motionlessly, until Mr.
Davidson was half through. Then she suddenly got on her feet.

"This is too dull for me," she exclaimed. "I want something more
exciting."

Mr. Davidson stopped short and Peg marched down the aisle in the midst
of complete silence. Half way down the aisle she turned around and faced
the minister.

"There are so many hypocrites in this church that it isn't fit for
decent people to come to," she said. "Rather than be such hypocrites as
most of you are it would be better for you to go miles into the woods
and commit suicide."

Wheeling about, she strode to the door. Then she turned for a Parthian
shot.

"I've felt kind of worried for God sometimes, seeing He has so much to
attend to," she said, "but I see I needn't be, so long's there's plenty
of ministers to tell Him what to do."

With that Peg shook the dust of Carlisle church from her feet. Poor Mr.
Davidson resumed his discourse. Old Elder Bayley, whose attention
an earthquake could not have distracted from the sermon, afterwards
declared that it was an excellent and edifying exhortation, but I doubt
if anyone else in Carlisle church tasted it much or gained much good
therefrom. Certainly we of the King household did not. We could not even
remember the text when we reached home. Felicity was comfortless.

"Mr. Davidson would be sure to think she belonged to our family when she
was in our pew," she said bitterly. "Oh, I feel as if I could never
get over such a mortification! Peter, I do wish you wouldn't go telling
people they ought to go to church. It's all your fault that this
happened."

"Never mind, it will be a good story to tell sometime," remarked the
Story Girl with relish.




CHAPTER XXII. THE YANKEE STORM


In an August orchard six children and a grown-up were sitting around the
pulpit stone. The grown-up was Miss Reade, who had been up to give the
girls their music lesson and had consented to stay to tea, much to the
rapture of the said girls, who continued to worship her with unabated
and romantic ardour. To us, over the golden grasses, came the Story
Girl, carrying in her hand a single large poppy, like a blood-red
chalice filled with the wine of August wizardry. She proffered it to
Miss Reade and, as the latter took it into her singularly slender,
beautiful hand, I saw a ring on her third finger. I noticed it, because
I had heard the girls say that Miss Reade never wore rings, not liking
them. It was not a new ring; it was handsome, but of an old-fashioned
design and setting, with a glint of diamonds about a central sapphire.
Later on, when Miss Reade had gone, I asked the Story Girl if she had
noticed the ring. She nodded, but seemed disinclined to say more about
it.

"Look here, Sara," I said, "there's something about that ring--something
you know."

"I told you once there was a story growing but you would have to wait
until it was fully grown," she answered.

"Is Miss Reade going to marry anybody--anybody we know?" I persisted.

"Curiosity killed a cat," observed the Story Girl coolly. "Miss Reade
hasn't told me that she was going to marry anybody. You will find out
all that is good for you to know in due time."

When the Story Girl put on grown-up airs I did not like her so well, and
I dropped the subject with a dignity that seemed to amuse her mightily.

She had been away for a week, visiting cousins in Markdale, and she had
come home with a new treasure-trove of stories, most of which she had
heard from the old sailors of Markdale Harbour. She had promised that
morning to tell us of "the most tragic event that had ever been known on
the north shore," and we now reminded her of her promise.

"Some call it the 'Yankee Storm,' and others the 'American Gale,'" she
began, sitting down by Miss Reade and beaming, because the latter
put her arm around her waist. "It happened nearly forty years ago, in
October of 1851. Old Mr. Coles at the Harbour told me all about it. He
was a young man then and he says he can never forget that dreadful time.
You know in those days hundreds of American fishing schooners used to
come down to the Gulf every summer to fish mackerel. On one beautiful
Saturday night in this October of 1851, more than one hundred of these
vessels could be counted from Markdale Capes. By Monday night more than
seventy of them had been destroyed. Those which had escaped were mostly
those which went into harbour Saturday night, to keep Sunday. Mr. Coles
says the rest stayed outside and fished all day Sunday, same as through
the week, and HE says the storm was a judgment on them for doing it. But
he admits that even some of them got into harbour later on and escaped,
so it's hard to know what to think. But it is certain that on Sunday
night there came up a sudden and terrible storm--the worst, Mr. Coles
says, that has ever been known on the north shore. It lasted for two
days and scores of vessels were driven ashore and completely wrecked.
The crews of most of the vessels that went ashore on the sand beaches
were saved, but those that struck on the rocks went to pieces and all
hands were lost. For weeks after the storm the north shore was strewn
with the bodies of drowned men. Think of it! Many of them were unknown
and unrecognizable, and they were buried in Markdale graveyard. Mr.
Coles says the schoolmaster who was in Markdale then wrote a poem on the
storm and Mr. Coles recited the first two verses to me.


    "'Here are the fishers' hillside graves,
      The church beside, the woods around,
      Below, the hollow moaning waves
      Where the poor fishermen were drowned.

    "'A sudden tempest the blue welkin tore,
      The seamen tossed and torn apart
      Rolled with the seaweed to the shore
      While landsmen gazed with aching heart.'


"Mr. Coles couldn't remember any more of it. But the saddest of all the
stories of the Yankee Storm was the one about the Franklin Dexter.
The Franklin Dexter went ashore on the Markdale Capes and all on board
perished, the Captain and three of his brothers among them. These four
young men were the sons of an old man who lived in Portland, Maine, and
when he heard what had happened he came right down to the Island to see
if he could find their bodies. They had all come ashore and had been
buried in Markdale graveyard; but he was determined to take them up and
carry them home for burial. He said he had promised their mother to take
her boys home to her and he must do it. So they were taken up and put
on board a sailing vessel at Markdale Harbour to be taken back to Maine,
while the father himself went home on a passenger steamer. The name of
the sailing vessel was the Seth Hall, and the captain's name was Seth
Hall, too. Captain Hall was a dreadfully profane man and used to swear
blood-curdling oaths. On the night he sailed out of Markdale Harbour the
old sailors warned him that a storm was brewing and that it would catch
him if he did not wait until it was over. The captain had become very
impatient because of several delays he had already met with, and he was
in a furious temper. He swore a wicked oath that he would sail out of
Markdale Harbour that night and 'God Almighty Himself shouldn't catch
him.' He did sail out of the harbour; and the storm did catch him, and
the Seth Hall went down with all hands, the dead and the living finding
a watery grave together. So the poor old mother up in Maine never had
her boys brought back to her after all. Mr. Coles says it seems as if it
were foreordained that they should not rest in a grave, but should lie
beneath the waves until the day when the sea gives up its dead."


    "'They sleep as well beneath that purple tide
      As others under turf,'"


quoted Miss Reade softly. "I am very thankful," she added, "that I am
not one of those whose dear ones 'go down to the sea in ships.' It seems
to me that they have treble their share of this world's heartache."

"Uncle Stephen was a sailor and he was drowned," said Felicity, "and
they say it broke Grandmother King's heart. I don't see why people can't
be contented on dry land."

Cecily's tears had been dropping on the autograph quilt square she was
faithfully embroidering. She had been diligently collecting names for it
ever since the preceding autumn and had a goodly number; but Kitty Marr
had one more and this was certainly a fly in Cecily's ointment.

"Besides, one I've got isn't paid for--Peg Bowen's," she lamented, "and
I don't suppose it ever will be, for I'll never dare to ask her for it."

"I wouldn't put it on at all," said Felicity.

"Oh, I don't dare not to. She'd be sure to find out I didn't and then
she'd be very angry. I wish I could get just one more name and then I'd
be contented. But I don't know of a single person who hasn't been asked
already."

"Except Mr. Campbell," said Dan.

"Oh, of course nobody would ask Mr. Campbell. We all know it would be
of no use. He doesn't believe in missions at all--in fact, he says he
detests the very mention of missions--and he never gives one cent to
them."

"All the same, I think he ought to be asked, so that he wouldn't have
the excuse that nobody DID ask him," declared Dan.

"Do you really think so, Dan?" asked Cecily earnestly.

"Sure," said Dan, solemnly. Dan liked to tease even Cecily a wee bit now
and then.

Cecily relapsed into anxious thought, and care sat visibly on her brow
for the rest of the day. Next morning she came to me and said:

"Bev, would you like to go for a walk with me this afternoon?"

"Of course," I replied. "Any particular where?"

"I'm going to see Mr. Campbell and ask him for his name for my square,"
said Cecily resolutely. "I don't suppose it will do any good. He
wouldn't give anything to the library last summer, you remember, till
the Story Girl told him that story about his grandmother. She won't
go with me this time--I don't know why. I can't tell a story and I'm
frightened to death just to think of going to him. But I believe it is
my duty; and besides I would love to get as many names on my square
as Kitty Marr has. So if you'll go with me we'll go this afternoon. I
simply COULDN'T go alone."




CHAPTER XXIII. A MISSIONARY HEROINE


Accordingly, that afternoon we bearded the lion in his den. The road we
took was a beautiful one, for we went "cross lots," and we enjoyed
it, in spite of the fact that we did not expect the interview with Mr.
Campbell to be a very pleasant one. To be sure, he had been quite civil
on the occasion of our last call upon him, but the Story Girl had been
with us then and had beguiled him into good-humour and generosity by
the magic of her voice and personality. We had no such ally now, and Mr.
Campbell was known to be virulently opposed to missions in any shape or
form.

"I don't know whether it would have been any better if I could have
put on my good clothes," said Cecily, with a rueful glance at her print
dress, which, though neat and clean, was undeniably faded and RATHER
short and tight. "The Story Girl said it would, and I wanted to, but
mother wouldn't let me. She said it was all nonsense, and Mr. Campbell
would never notice what I had on."

"It's my opinion that Mr. Campbell notices a good deal more than you'd
think for," I said sagely.

"Well, I wish our call was over," sighed Cecily. "I can't tell you how I
dread it."

"Now, see here, Sis," I said cheerfully, "let's not think about it
till we get there. It'll only spoil our walk and do no good. Let's just
forget it and enjoy ourselves."

"I'll try," agreed Cecily, "but it's ever so much easier to preach than
to practise."

Our way lay first over a hill top, gallantly plumed with golden rod,
where cloud shadows drifted over us like a gypsying crew. Carlisle, in
all its ripely tinted length and breadth, lay below us, basking in the
August sunshine, that spilled over the brim of the valley to the far-off
Markdale Harbour, cupped in its harvest-golden hills.

Then came a little valley overgrown with the pale purple bloom of
thistles and elusively haunted with their perfume. You say that thistles
have no perfume? Go you to a brook hollow where they grow some late
summer twilight at dewfall; and on the still air that rises suddenly to
meet you will come a waft of faint, aromatic fragrance, wondrously sweet
and evasive, the distillation of that despised thistle bloom.

Beyond this the path wound through a forest of fir, where a wood wind
wove its murmurous spell and a wood brook dimpled pellucidly among the
shadows--the dear, companionable, elfin shadows--that lurked under the
low growing boughs. Along the edges of that winding path grew banks
of velvet green moss, starred with clusters of pigeon berries. Pigeon
berries are not to be eaten. They are woolly, tasteless things. But they
are to be looked at in their glowing scarlet. They are the jewels with
which the forest of cone-bearers loves to deck its brown breast. Cecily
gathered some and pinned them on hers, but they did not become her.
I thought how witching the Story Girl's brown curls would have looked
twined with those brilliant clusters. Perhaps Cecily was thinking of it,
too, for she presently said,

"Bev, don't you think the Story Girl is changing somehow?"

"There are times--just times--when she seems to belong more among the
grown-ups than among us," I said, reluctantly, "especially when she puts
on her bridesmaid dress."

"Well, she's the oldest of us, and when you come to think of it, she's
fifteen,--that's almost grown-up," sighed Cecily. Then she added, with
sudden vehemence, "I hate the thought of any of us growing up. Felicity
says she just longs to be grown-up, but I don't, not a bit. I wish I
could just stay a little girl for ever--and have you and Felix and
all the others for playmates right along. I don't know how it is--but
whenever I think of being grown-up I seem to feel tired."

Something about Cecily's speech--or the wistful look that had crept into
her sweet brown eyes--made me feel vaguely uncomfortable; I was glad
that we were at the end of our journey, with Mr. Campbell's big house
before us, and his dog sitting gravely at the veranda steps.

"Oh, dear," said Cecily, with a shiver, "I'd been hoping that dog
wouldn't be around."

"He never bites," I assured her.

"Perhaps he doesn't, but he always looks as if he was going to,"
rejoined Cecily.

The dog continued to look, and, as we edged gingerly past him and up
the veranda steps, he turned his head and kept on looking. What with
Mr. Campbell before us and the dog behind, Cecily was trembling with
nervousness; but perhaps it was as well that the dour brute was there,
else I verily believe she would have turned and fled shamelessly when we
heard steps in the hall.

It was Mr. Campbell's housekeeper who came to the door, however; she
ushered us pleasantly into the sitting-room where Mr. Campbell was
reading. He laid down his book with a slight frown and said nothing at
all in response to our timid "good afternoon." But after we had sat for
a few minutes in wretched silence, wishing ourselves a thousand miles
away, he said, with a chuckle,

"Well, is it the school library again?"

Cecily had remarked as we were coming that what she dreaded most of all
was introducing the subject; but Mr. Campbell had given her a splendid
opening, and she plunged wildly in at once, rattling her explanation off
nervously with trembling voice and flushed cheeks.

"No, it's our Mission Band autograph quilt, Mr. Campbell. There are to
be as many squares in it as there are members in the Band. Each one has
a square and is collecting names for it. If you want to have your name
on the quilt you pay five cents, and if you want to have it right in the
round spot in the middle of the square you must pay ten cents. Then when
we have got all the names we can we will embroider them on the squares.
The money is to go to the little girl our Band is supporting in Korea. I
heard that nobody had asked you, so I thought perhaps you would give me
your name for my square."

Mr. Campbell drew his black brows together in a scowl.

"Stuff and nonsense!" he exclaimed angrily. "I don't believe in Foreign
Missions--don't believe in them at all. I never give a cent to them."

"Five cents isn't a very large sum," said Cecily earnestly.

Mr. Campbell's scowl disappeared and he laughed.

"It wouldn't break me," he admitted, "but it's the principle of the
thing. And as for that Mission Band of yours, if it wasn't for the fun
you get out of it, catch one of you belonging. You don't really care a
rap more for the heathen than I do."

"Oh, we do," protested Cecily. "We do think of all the poor little
children in Korea, and we like to think we are helping them, if it's
ever so little. We ARE in earnest, Mr. Campbell--indeed we are."

"Don't believe it--don't believe a word of it," said Mr. Campbell
impolitely. "You'll do things that are nice and interesting. You'll get
up concerts, and chase people about for autographs and give money your
parents give you and that doesn't cost you either time or labour. But
you wouldn't do anything you disliked for the heathen children--you
wouldn't make any real sacrifice for them--catch you!"

"Indeed we would," cried Cecily, forgetting her timidity in her zeal. "I
just wish I had a chance to prove it to you."

"You do, eh? Come, now, I'll take you at your word. I'll test you.
Tomorrow is Communion Sunday and the church will be full of folks and
they'll all have their best clothes on. If you go to church tomorrow in
the very costume you have on at present, without telling anyone why you
do so, until it is all over, I'll give you--why, I vow I'll give you
five dollars for that quilt of yours."

Poor Cecily! To go to church in a faded print dress, with a shabby
little old sun-hat and worn shoes! It was very cruel of Mr. Campbell.

"I--I don't think mother would let me," she faltered.

Her tormentor smiled grimly.

"It's not hard to find some excuse," he said sarcastically.

Cecily crimsoned and sat up facing Mr. Campbell spunkily.

"It's NOT an excuse," she said. "If mother will let me go to church like
this I'll go. But I'll have to tell HER why, Mr. Campbell, because I'm
certain she'd never let me if I didn't."

"Oh, you can tell all your own family," said Mr. Campbell, "but
remember, none of them must tell it outside until Sunday is over. If
they do, I'll be sure to find it out and then our bargain is off. If
I see you in church tomorrow, dressed as you are now, I'll give you my
name and five dollars. But I won't see you. You'll shrink when you've
had time to think it over."

"I sha'n't," said Cecily resolutely.

"Well, we'll see. And now come out to the barn with me. I've got the
prettiest little drove of calves out there you ever saw. I want you to
see them."

Mr. Campbell took us all over his barns and was very affable. He had
beautiful horses, cows and sheep, and I enjoyed seeing them. I don't
think Cecily did, however. She was very quiet and even Mr. Campbell's
handsome new span of dappled grays failed to arouse any enthusiasm in
her. She was already in bitter anticipation living over the martyrdom
of the morrow. On the way home she asked me seriously if I thought Mr.
Campbell would go to heaven when he died.

"Of course he will," I said. "Isn't he a member of the church?"

"Oh, yes, but I can't imagine him fitting into heaven. You know he isn't
really fond of anything but live stock."

"He's fond of teasing people, I guess," I responded. "Are you really
going to church to-morrow in that dress, Sis?"

"If mother'll let me I'll have to," said poor Cecily. "I won't let Mr.
Campbell triumph over me. And I DO want to have as many names as Kitty
has. And I DO want to help the poor little Korean children. But it will
be simply dreadful. I don't know whether I hope mother will or not."

I did not believe she would, but Aunt Janet sometimes could be depended
on for the unexpected. She laughed and told Cecily she could please
herself. Felicity was in a rage over it, and declared SHE wouldn't go to
church if Cecily went in such a rig. Dan sarcastically inquired if all
she went to church for was to show off her fine clothes and look at
other people's; then they quarrelled and didn't speak to each other for
two days, much to Cecily's distress.

I suspect poor Sis wished devoutly that it might rain the next day; but
it was gloriously fine. We were all waiting in the orchard for the Story
Girl who had not begun to dress for church until Cecily and Felicity
were ready. Felicity was her prettiest in flower-trimmed hat, crisp
muslin, floating ribbons and trim black slippers. Poor Cecily stood
beside her mute and pale, in her faded school garb and heavy copper-toed
boots. But her face, if pale, was very determined. Cecily, having put
her hand to the plough, was not of those who turn back.

"You do look just awful," said Felicity. "I don't care--I'm going to
sit in Uncle James' pew. I WON'T sit with you. There will be so many
strangers there, and all the Markdale people, and what will they think
of you? Some of them will never know the reason, either."

"I wish the Story Girl would hurry," was all poor Cecily said. "We're
going to be late. It wouldn't have been quite so hard if I could have
got there before anyone and slipped quietly into our pew."

"Here she comes at last," said Dan. "Why--what's she got on?"

The Story Girl joined us with a quizzical smile on her face. Dan
whistled. Cecily's pale cheeks flushed with understanding and gratitude.
The Story Girl wore her school print dress and hat also, and was
gloveless and heavy shod.

"You're not going to have to go through this all alone, Cecily," she
said.

"Oh, it won't be half so hard now," said Cecily, with a long breath of
relief.

I fancy it was hard enough even then. The Story Girl did not care a
whit, but Cecily rather squirmed under the curious glances that were
cast at her. She afterwards told me that she really did not think she
could have endured it if she had been alone.

Mr. Campbell met us under the elms in the churchyard, with a twinkle in
his eye.

"Well, you did it, Miss," he said to Cecily, "but you should have been
alone. That was what I meant. I suppose you think you've cheated me
nicely."

"No, she doesn't," spoke up the Story Girl undauntedly. "She was all
dressed and ready to come before she knew I was going to dress the same
way. So she kept her bargain faithfully, Mr. Campbell, and I think you
were cruel to make her do it."

"You do, eh? Well, well, I hope you'll forgive me. I didn't think she'd
do it--I was sure feminine vanity would win the day over missionary
zeal. It seems it didn't--though how much was pure missionary zeal and
how much just plain King spunk I'm doubtful. I'll keep my promise, Miss.
You shall have your five dollars, and mind you put my name in the round
space. No five-cent corners for me."




CHAPTER XXIV. A TANTALIZING REVELATION


"I shall have something to tell you in the orchard this evening," said
the Story Girl at breakfast one morning. Her eyes were very bright and
excited. She looked as if she had not slept a great deal. She had spent
the previous evening with Miss Reade and had not returned until the rest
of us were in bed. Miss Reade had finished giving music lessons and was
going home in a few days. Cecily and Felicity were in despair over this
and mourned as those without comfort. But the Story Girl, who had been
even more devoted to Miss Reade than either of them, had not, as I
noticed, expressed any regret and seemed to be very cheerful over the
whole matter.

"Why can't you tell it now?" asked Felicity.

"Because the evening is the nicest time to tell things in. I only
mentioned it now so that you would have something interesting to look
forward to all day."

"Is it about Miss Reade?" asked Cecily.

"Never mind."

"I'll bet she's going to be married," I exclaimed, remembering the ring.

"Is she?" cried Felicity and Cecily together.

The Story Girl threw an annoyed glance at me. She did not like to have
her dramatic announcements forestalled.

"I don't say that it is about Miss Reade or that it isn't. You must just
wait till the evening."

"I wonder what it is," speculated Cecily, as the Story Girl left the
room.

"I don't believe it's much of anything," said Felicity, beginning to
clear away the breakfast dishes. "The Story Girl always likes to make so
much out of so little. Anyhow, I don't believe Miss Reade is going to be
married. She hasn't any beaus around here and Mrs. Armstrong says
she's sure she doesn't correspond with anybody. Besides, if she was she
wouldn't be likely to tell the Story Girl."

"Oh, she might. They're such friends, you know," said Cecily.

"Miss Reade is no better friends with her than she is with me and you,"
retorted Felicity.

"No, but sometimes it seems to me that she's a different kind of friend
with the Story Girl than she is with me and you," reflected Cecily. "I
can't just explain what I mean."

"No wonder. Such nonsense," sniffed Felicity. "It's only some girl's
secret, anyway," said Dan, loftily. "I don't feel much interest in it."

But he was on hand with the rest of us that evening, interest or no
interest, in Uncle Stephen's Walk, where the ripening apples were
beginning to glow like jewels among the boughs.

"Now, are you going to tell us your news?" asked Felicity impatiently.

"Miss Reade IS going to be married," said the Story Girl. "She told me
so last night. She is going to be married in a fortnight's time."

"Who to?" exclaimed the girls.

"To"--the Story Girl threw a defiant glance at me as if to say, "You
can't spoil the surprise of THIS, anyway,"--"to--the Awkward Man."

For a few moments amazement literally held us dumb.

"You're not in earnest, Sara Stanley?" gasped Felicity at last.

"Indeed I am. I thought you'd be astonished. But I wasn't. I've
suspected it all summer, from little things I've noticed. Don't you
remember that evening last spring when I went a piece with Miss Reade
and told you when I came back that a story was growing? I guessed it
from the way the Awkward Man looked at her when I stopped to speak to
him over his garden fence."

"But--the Awkward Man!" said Felicity helplessly. "It doesn't seem
possible. Did Miss Reade tell you HERSELF?"

"Yes."

"I suppose it must be true then. But how did it ever come about? He's
SO shy and awkward. How did he ever manage to get up enough spunk to ask
her to marry him?"

"Maybe she asked him," suggested Dan.

The Story Girl looked as if she might tell if she would.

"I believe that WAS the way of it," I said, to draw her on.

"Not exactly," she said reluctantly. "I know all about it but I can't
tell you. I guessed part from things I've seen--and Miss Reade told me a
good deal--and the Awkward Man himself told me his side of it as we came
home last night. I met him just as I left Mr. Armstrong's and we were
together as far as his house. It was dark and he just talked on as if he
were talking to himself--I think he forgot I was there at all, once
he got started. He has never been shy or awkward with me, but he never
talked as he did last night."

"You might tell us what he said," urged Cecily. "We'd never tell."

The Story Girl shook her head.

"No, I can't. You wouldn't understand. Besides, I couldn't tell it just
right. It's one of the things that are hardest to tell. I'd spoil it if
I told it--now. Perhaps some day I'll be able to tell it properly. It's
very beautiful--but it might sound very ridiculous if it wasn't told
just exactly the right way."

"I don't know what you mean, and I don't believe you know yourself,"
said Felicity pettishly. "All that I can make out is that Miss Reade is
going to marry Jasper Dale, and I don't like the idea one bit. She is
so beautiful and sweet. I thought she'd marry some dashing young man.
Jasper Dale must be nearly twenty years older than her--and he's so
queer and shy--and such a hermit."

"Miss Reade is perfectly happy," said the Story Girl. "She thinks the
Awkward Man is lovely--and so he is. You don't know him, but I do."

"Well, you needn't put on such airs about it," sniffed Felicity.

"I am not putting on any airs. But it's true. Miss Reade and I are the
only people in Carlisle who really know the Awkward Man. Nobody else
ever got behind his shyness to find out just what sort of a man he is."

"When are they to be married?" asked Felicity.

"In a fortnight's time. And then they are coming right back to live at
Golden Milestone. Won't it be lovely to have Miss Reade always so near
us?"

"I wonder what she'll think about the mystery of Golden Milestone,"
remarked Felicity.

Golden Milestone was the beautiful name the Awkward Man had given his
home; and there was a mystery about it, as readers of the first volume
of these chronicles will recall.

"She knows all about the mystery and thinks it perfectly lovely--and so
do I," said the Story Girl.

"Do YOU know the secret of the locked room?" cried Cecily.

"Yes, the Awkward Man told me all about it last night. I told you I'd
find out the mystery some time."

"And what is it?"

"I can't tell you that either."

"I think you're hateful and mean," exclaimed Felicity. "It hasn't
anything to do with Miss Reade, so I think you might tell us."

"It has something to do with Miss Reade. It's all about her."

"Well, I don't see how that can be when the Awkward Man never saw or
heard of Miss Reade until she came to Carlisle in the spring," said
Felicity incredulously, "and he's had that locked room for years."

"I can't explain it to you--but it's just as I've said," responded the
Story Girl.

"Well, it's a very queer thing," retorted Felicity.

"The name in the books in the room was Alice--and Miss Reade's name is
Alice," marvelled Cecily. "Did he know her before she came here?"

"Mrs. Griggs says that room has been locked for ten years. Ten years ago
Miss Reade was just a little girl of ten. SHE couldn't be the Alice of
the books," argued Felicity.

"I wonder if she'll wear the blue silk dress," said Sara Ray.

"And what will she do about the picture, if it isn't hers?" added
Cecily.

"The picture couldn't be hers, or Mrs. Griggs would have known her for
the same when she came to Carlisle," said Felix.

"I'm going to stop wondering about it," exclaimed Felicity crossly,
aggravated by the amused smile with which the Story Girl was listening
to the various speculations. "I think Sara is just as mean as mean when
she won't tell us."

"I can't," repeated the Story Girl patiently.

"You said one time you had an idea who 'Alice' was," I said. "Was your
idea anything like the truth?"

"Yes, I guessed pretty nearly right."

"Do you suppose they'll keep the room locked after they are married?"
asked Cecily.

"Oh, no. I can tell you that much. It is to be Miss Reade's own
particular sitting room."

"Why, then, perhaps we'll see it some time ourselves, when we go to see
Miss Reade," cried Cecily.

"I'd be frightened to go into it," confessed Sara Ray. "I hate things
with mysteries. They always make me nervous."

"I love them. They're so exciting," said the Story Girl.

"Just think, this will be the second wedding of people we know,"
reflected Cecily. "Isn't that interesting?"

"I only hope the next thing won't be a funeral," remarked Sara Ray
gloomily. "There were three lighted lamps on our kitchen table last
night, and Judy Pineau says that's a sure sign of a funeral."

"Well, there are funerals going on all the time," said Dan.

"But it means the funeral of somebody you know. I don't believe in
it--MUCH--but Judy says she's seen it come true time and again. I hope
if it does it won't be anybody we know very well. But I hope it'll be
somebody I know a LITTLE, because then I might get to the funeral. I'd
just love to go to a funeral."

"That's a dreadful thing to say," commented Felicity in a shocked tone.

Sara Ray looked bewildered.

"I don't see what is dreadful in it," she protested.

"People don't go to funerals for the fun of it," said Felicity severely.
"And you just as good as said you hoped somebody you knew would die so
you'd get to the funeral."

"No, no, I didn't. I didn't mean that AT ALL, Felicity. I don't want
anybody to die; but what I meant was, if anybody I knew HAD to die there
might be a chance to go to the funeral. I've never been to a single
funeral yet, and it must be so interesting."

"Well, don't mix up talk about funerals with talk about weddings," said
Felicity. "It isn't lucky. I think Miss Reade is simply throwing herself
away, but I hope she'll be happy. And I hope the Awkward Man will manage
to get married without making some awful blunder, but it's more than I
expect."

"The ceremony is to be very private," said the Story Girl.

"I'd like to see them the day they appear out in church," chuckled Dan.
"How'll he ever manage to bring her in and show her into the pew? I'll
bet he'll go in first--or tramp on her dress--or fall over his feet."

"Maybe he won't go to church at all the first Sunday and she'll have to
go alone," said Peter. "That happened in Markdale. A man was too bashful
to go to church the first time after getting married, and his wife went
alone till he got used to the idea."

"They may do things like that in Markdale but that is not the way people
behave in Carlisle," said Felicity loftily.

Seeing the Story Girl slipping away with a disapproving face I joined
her.

"What is the matter, Sara?" I asked.

"I hate to hear them talking like that about Miss Reade and Mr. Dale,"
she answered vehemently. "It's really all so beautiful--but they make it
seem silly and absurd, somehow."

"You might tell me all about it, Sara," I insinuated. "I wouldn't
tell--and I'd understand."

"Yes, I think you would," she said thoughtfully. "But I can't tell it
even to you because I can't tell it well enough yet. I've a feeling that
there's only one way to tell it--and I don't know the way yet. Some day
I'll know it--and then I'll tell you, Bev."

Long, long after she kept her word. Forty years later I wrote to her,
across the leagues of land and sea that divided us, and told her that
Jasper Dale was dead; and I reminded her of her old promise and asked
its fulfilment. In reply she sent me the written love story of Jasper
Dale and Alice Reade. Now, when Alice sleeps under the whispering elms
of the old Carlisle churchyard, beside the husband of her youth, that
story may be given, in all its old-time sweetness, to the world.




CHAPTER XXV. THE LOVE STORY OF THE AWKWARD MAN

(Written by the Story Girl)


Jasper Dale lived alone in the old homestead which he had named Golden
Milestone. In Carlisle this giving one's farm a name was looked upon as
a piece of affectation; but if a place must be named why not give it
a sensible name with some meaning to it? Why Golden Milestone, when
Pinewood or Hillslope or, if you wanted to be very fanciful, Ivy Lodge,
might be had for the taking?

He had lived alone at Golden Milestone since his mother's death; he had
been twenty then and he was close upon forty now, though he did not look
it. But neither could it be said that he looked young; he had never at
any time looked young with common youth; there had always been something
in his appearance that stamped him as different from the ordinary run
of men, and, apart from his shyness, built up an intangible, invisible
barrier between him and his kind. He had lived all his life in Carlisle;
and all the Carlisle people knew of or about him--although they thought
they knew everything--was that he was painfully, abnormally shy. He
never went anywhere except to church; he never took part in Carlisle's
simple social life; even with most men he was distant and reserved; as
for women, he never spoke to or looked at them; if one spoke to him,
even if she were a matronly old mother in Israel, he was at once in an
agony of painful blushes. He had no friends in the sense of companions;
to all outward appearance his life was solitary and devoid of any human
interest.

He had no housekeeper; but his old house, furnished as it had been in
his mother's lifetime, was cleanly and daintily kept. The quaint rooms
were as free from dust and disorder as a woman could have had them. This
was known, because Jasper Dale occasionally had his hired man's wife,
Mrs. Griggs, in to scrub for him. On the morning she was expected he
betook himself to woods and fields, returning only at night-fall. During
his absence Mrs. Griggs was frankly wont to explore the house from
cellar to attic, and her report of its condition was always the
same--"neat as wax." To be sure, there was one room that was always
locked against her, the west gable, looking out on the garden and the
hill of pines beyond. But Mrs. Griggs knew that in the lifetime of
Jasper Dale's mother it had been unfurnished. She supposed it still
remained so, and felt no especial curiosity concerning it, though she
always tried the door.

Jasper Dale had a good farm, well cultivated; he had a large garden
where he worked most of his spare time in summer; it was supposed that
he read a great deal, since the postmistress declared that he was always
getting books and magazines by mail. He seemed well contented with his
existence and people let him alone, since that was the greatest kindness
they could do him. It was unsupposable that he would ever marry; nobody
ever had supposed it.

"Jasper Dale never so much as THOUGHT about a woman," Carlisle oracles
declared. Oracles, however, are not always to be trusted.

One day Mrs. Griggs went away from the Dale place with a very curious
story, which she diligently spread far and wide. It made a good deal
of talk, but people, although they listened eagerly, and wondered and
questioned, were rather incredulous about it. They thought Mrs. Griggs
must be drawing considerably upon her imagination; there were not
lacking those who declared that she had invented the whole account,
since her reputation for strict veracity was not wholly unquestioned.

Mrs. Griggs's story was as follows:--

One day she found the door of the west gable unlocked. She went in,
expecting to see bare walls and a collection of odds and ends. Instead
she found herself in a finely furnished room. Delicate lace curtains
hung before the small, square, broad-silled windows. The walls were
adorned with pictures in much finer taste than Mrs. Griggs could
appreciate. There was a bookcase between the windows filled with
choicely bound books. Beside it stood a little table with a very dainty
work-basket on it. By the basket Mrs. Griggs saw a pair of tiny scissors
and a silver thimble. A wicker rocker, comfortable with silk cushions,
was near it. Above the bookcase a woman's picture hung--a water-colour,
if Mrs. Griggs had but known it--representing a pale, very sweet face,
with large, dark eyes and a wistful expression under loose masses of
black, lustrous hair. Just beneath the picture, on the top shelf of the
bookcase, was a vaseful of flowers. Another vaseful stood on the table
beside the basket.

All this was astonishing enough. But what puzzled Mrs. Griggs completely
was the fact that a woman's dress was hanging over a chair before the
mirror--a pale blue, silken affair. And on the floor beside it were two
little blue satin slippers!

Good Mrs. Griggs did not leave the room until she had thoroughly
explored it, even to shaking out the blue dress and discovering it to be
a tea-gown--wrapper, she called it. But she found nothing to throw any
light on the mystery. The fact that the simple name "Alice" was written
on the fly-leaves of all the books only deepened it, for it was a name
unknown in the Dale family. In this puzzled state she was obliged to
depart, nor did she ever find the door unlocked again; and, discovering
that people thought she was romancing when she talked about the
mysterious west gable at Golden Milestone, she indignantly held her
peace concerning the whole affair.

But Mrs. Griggs had told no more than the simple truth. Jasper Dale,
under all his shyness and aloofness, possessed a nature full of delicate
romance and poesy, which, denied expression in the common ways of life,
bloomed out in the realm of fancy and imagination. Left alone, just when
the boy's nature was deepening into the man's, he turned to this ideal
kingdom for all he believed the real world could never give him. Love--a
strange, almost mystical love--played its part here for him. He shadowed
forth to himself the vision of a woman, loving and beloved; he cherished
it until it became almost as real to him as his own personality and he
gave this dream woman the name he liked best--Alice. In fancy he walked
and talked with her, spoke words of love to her, and heard words of love
in return. When he came from work at the close of day she met him at his
threshold in the twilight--a strange, fair, starry shape, as elusive and
spiritual as a blossom reflected in a pool by moonlight--with welcome on
her lips and in her eyes.

One day, when he was in Charlottetown on business, he had been struck by
a picture in the window of a store. It was strangely like the woman of
his dream love. He went in, awkward and embarrassed, and bought it. When
he took it home he did not know where to put it. It was out of place
among the dim old engravings of bewigged portraits and conventional
landscapes on the walls of Golden Milestone. As he pondered the matter
in his garden that evening he had an inspiration. The sunset, flaming on
the windows of the west gable, kindled them into burning rose. Amid the
splendour he fancied Alice's fair face peeping archly down at him from
the room. The inspiration came then. It should be her room; he would fit
it up for her; and her picture should hang there.

He was all summer carrying out his plan. Nobody must know or suspect,
so he must go slowly and secretly. One by one the furnishings were
purchased and brought home under cover of darkness. He arranged them
with his own hands. He bought the books he thought she would like best
and wrote her name in them; he got the little feminine knick-knacks of
basket and thimble. Finally he saw in a store a pale blue tea-gown and
the satin slippers. He had always fancied her as dressed in blue. He
bought them and took them home to her room. Thereafter it was sacred to
her; he always knocked on its door before he entered; he kept it sweet
with fresh flowers; he sat there in the purple summer evenings and
talked aloud to her or read his favourite books to her. In his fancy she
sat opposite to him in her rocker, clad in the trailing blue gown, with
her head leaning on one slender hand, as white as a twilight star.

But Carlisle people knew nothing of this--would have thought him tinged
with mild lunacy if they had known. To them, he was just the shy, simple
farmer he appeared. They never knew or guessed at the real Jasper Dale.

One spring Alice Reade came to teach music in Carlisle. Her pupils
worshipped her, but the grown people thought she was rather too distant
and reserved. They had been used to merry, jolly girls who joined
eagerly in the social life of the place. Alice Reade held herself aloof
from it--not disdainfully, but as one to whom these things were of small
importance. She was very fond of books and solitary rambles; she was
not at all shy but she was as sensitive as a flower; and after a time
Carlisle people were content to let her live her own life and no longer
resented her unlikeness to themselves.

She boarded with the Armstrongs, who lived beyond Golden Milestone
around the hill of pines. Until the snow disappeared she went out to the
main road by the long Armstrong lane; but when spring came she was wont
to take a shorter way, down the pine hill, across the brook, past Jasper
Dale's garden, and out through his lane. And one day, as she went by,
Jasper Dale was working in his garden.

He was on his knees in a corner, setting out a bunch of roots--an
unsightly little tangle of rainbow possibilities. It was a still spring
morning; the world was green with young leaves; a little wind blew down
from the pines and lost itself willingly among the budding delights of
the garden. The grass opened eyes of blue violets. The sky was high
and cloudless, turquoise-blue, shading off into milkiness on the far
horizons. Birds were singing along the brook valley. Rollicking robins
were whistling joyously in the pines. Jasper Dale's heart was filled to
over-flowing with a realization of all the virgin loveliness around him;
the feeling in his soul had the sacredness of a prayer. At this moment
he looked up and saw Alice Reade.

She was standing outside the garden fence, in the shadow of a great pine
tree, looking not at him, for she was unaware of his presence, but
at the virginal bloom of the plum trees in a far corner, with all her
delight in it outblossoming freely in her face. For a moment Jasper Dale
believed that his dream love had taken visible form before him. She was
like--so like; not in feature, perhaps, but in grace and colouring--the
grace of a slender, lissome form and the colouring of cloudy hair and
wistful, dark gray eyes, and curving red mouth; and more than all, she
was like her in expression--in the subtle revelation of personality
exhaling from her like perfume from a flower. It was as if his own had
come to him at last and his whole soul suddenly leaped out to meet and
welcome her.

Then her eyes fell upon him and the spell was broken. Jasper remained
kneeling mutely there, shy man once more, crimson with blushes, a
strange, almost pitiful creature in his abject confusion. A little smile
flickered about the delicate corners of her mouth, but she turned and
walked swiftly away down the lane.

Jasper looked after her with a new, painful sense of loss and
loveliness. It had been agony to feel her conscious eyes upon him, but
he realized now that there had been a strange sweetness in it, too. It
was still greater pain to watch her going from him.

He thought she must be the new music teacher but he did not even know
her name. She had been dressed in blue, too--a pale, dainty blue; but
that was of course; he had known she must wear it; and he was sure her
name must be Alice. When, later on, he discovered that it was, he felt
no surprise.

He carried some mayflowers up to the west gable and put them under the
picture. But the charm had gone out of the tribute; and looking at the
picture, he thought how scant was the justice it did her. Her face
was so much sweeter, her eyes so much softer, her hair so much more
lustrous. The soul of his love had gone from the room and from the
picture and from his dreams. When he tried to think of the Alice he
loved he saw, not the shadowy spirit occupant of the west gable, but the
young girl who had stood under the pine, beautiful with the beauty of
moonlight, of starshine on still water, of white, wind-swayed flowers
growing in silent, shadowy places. He did not then realize what this
meant: had he realized it he would have suffered bitterly; as it was
he felt only a vague discomfort--a curious sense of loss and gain
commingled.

He saw her again that afternoon on her way home. She did not pause by
the garden but walked swiftly past. Thereafter, every day for a week he
watched unseen to see her pass his home. Once a little child was with
her, clinging to her hand. No child had ever before had any part in the
shy man's dream life. But that night in the twilight the vision of
the rocking-chair was a girl in a blue print dress, with a little,
golden-haired shape at her knee--a shape that lisped and prattled and
called her "mother;" and both of them were his.

It was the next day that he failed for the first time to put flowers
in the west gable. Instead, he cut a loose handful of daffodils and,
looking furtively about him as if committing a crime, he laid them
across the footpath under the pine. She must pass that way; her feet
would crush them if she failed to see them. Then he slipped back into
his garden, half exultant, half repentant. From a safe retreat he saw
her pass by and stoop to lift his flowers. Thereafter he put some in the
same place every day.

When Alice Reade saw the flowers she knew at once who had put them
there, and divined that they were for her. She lifted them tenderly in
much surprise and pleasure. She had heard all about Jasper Dale and his
shyness; but before she had heard about him she had seen him in church
and liked him. She thought his face and his dark blue eyes beautiful;
she even liked the long brown hair that Carlisle people laughed at. That
he was quite different from other people she had understood at once, but
she thought the difference in his favour. Perhaps her sensitive nature
divined and responded to the beauty in his. At least, in her eyes Jasper
Dale was never a ridiculous figure.

When she heard the story of the west gable, which most people
disbelieved, she believed it, although she did not understand it. It
invested the shy man with interest and romance. She felt that she would
have liked, out of no impertinent curiosity, to solve the mystery; she
believed that it contained the key to his character.

Thereafter, every day she found flowers under the pine tree; she wished
to see Jasper to thank him, unaware that he watched her daily from the
screen of shrubbery in his garden; but it was some time before she found
the opportunity. One evening she passed when he, not expecting her, was
leaning against his garden fence with a book in his hand. She stopped
under the pine.

"Mr. Dale," she said softly, "I want to thank you for your flowers."

Jasper, startled, wished that he might sink into the ground. His anguish
of embarrassment made her smile a little. He could not speak, so she
went on gently.

"It has been so good of you. They have given me so much pleasure--I wish
you could know how much."

"It was nothing--nothing," stammered Jasper. His book had fallen on the
ground at her feet, and she picked it up and held it out to him.

"So you like Ruskin," she said. "I do, too. But I haven't read this."

"If you--would care--to read it--you may have it," Jasper contrived to
say.

She carried the book away with her. He did not again hide when she
passed, and when she brought the book back they talked a little about
it over the fence. He lent her others, and got some from her in return;
they fell into the habit of discussing them. Jasper did not find it hard
to talk to her now; it seemed as if he were talking to his dream Alice,
and it came strangely natural to him. He did not talk volubly, but
Alice thought what he did say was worth while. His words lingered in her
memory and made music. She always found his flowers under the pine, and
she always wore some of them, but she did not know if he noticed this or
not.

One evening Jasper walked shyly with her from his gate up the pine hill.
After that he always walked that far with her. She would have missed him
much if he had failed to do so; yet it did not occur to her that she was
learning to love him. She would have laughed with girlish scorn at the
idea. She liked him very much; she thought his nature beautiful in
its simplicity and purity; in spite of his shyness she felt more
delightfully at home in his society than in that of any other person she
had ever met. He was one of those rare souls whose friendship is at once
a pleasure and a benediction, showering light from their own crystal
clearness into all the dark corners in the souls of others, until, for
the time being at least, they reflected his own nobility. But she never
thought of love. Like other girls she had her dreams of a possible
Prince Charming, young and handsome and debonair. It never occurred
to her that he might be found in the shy, dreamy recluse of Golden
Milestone.

In August came a day of gold and blue. Alice Reade, coming through the
trees, with the wind blowing her little dark love-locks tricksily about
under her wide blue hat, found a fragrant heap of mignonette under
the pine. She lifted it and buried her face in it, drinking in the
wholesome, modest perfume.

She had hoped Jasper would be in his garden, since she wished to ask him
for a book she greatly desired to read. But she saw him sitting on the
rustic seat at the further side. His back was towards her, and he was
partially screened by a copse of lilacs.

Alice, blushing slightly, unlatched the garden gate, and went down the
path. She had never been in the garden before, and she found her heart
beating in a strange fashion.

He did not hear her footsteps, and she was close behind him when she
heard his voice, and realized that he was talking to himself, in a low,
dreamy tone. As the meaning of his words dawned on her consciousness she
started and grew crimson. She could not move or speak; as one in a
dream she stood and listened to the shy man's reverie, guiltless of any
thought of eavesdropping.

"How much I love you, Alice," Jasper Dale was saying, unafraid, with no
shyness in voice or manner. "I wonder what you would say if you knew.
You would laugh at me--sweet as you are, you would laugh in mockery. I
can never tell you. I can only dream of telling you. In my dream you are
standing here by me, dear. I can see you very plainly, my sweet lady, so
tall and gracious, with your dark hair and your maiden eyes. I can dream
that I tell you my love; that--maddest, sweetest dream of all--that you
love me in return. Everything is possible in dreams, you know, dear. My
dreams are all I have, so I go far in them, even to dreaming that you
are my wife. I dream how I shall fix up my dull old house for you. One
room will need nothing more--it is your room, dear, and has been ready
for you a long time--long before that day I saw you under the pine. Your
books and your chair and your picture are there, dear--only the picture
is not half lovely enough. But the other rooms of the house must be made
to bloom out freshly for you. What a delight it is thus to dream of
what I would do for you! Then I would bring you home, dear, and lead
you through my garden and into my house as its mistress. I would see you
standing beside me in the old mirror at the end of the hall--a bride,
in your pale blue dress, with a blush on your face. I would lead you
through all the rooms made ready for your coming, and then to your own.
I would see you sitting in your own chair and all my dreams would
find rich fulfilment in that royal moment. Oh, Alice, we would have a
beautiful life together! It's sweet to make believe about it. You will
sing to me in the twilight, and we will gather early flowers together
in the spring days. When I come home from work, tired, you will put
your arms about me and lay your head on my shoulder. I will stroke
it--so--that bonny, glossy head of yours. Alice, my Alice--all mine in
my dream--never to be mine in real life--how I love you!"

The Alice behind him could bear no more. She gave a little choking cry
that betrayed her presence. Jasper Dale sprang up and gazed upon her. He
saw her standing there, amid the languorous shadows of August, pale with
feeling, wide-eyed, trembling.

For a moment shyness wrung him. Then every trace of it was banished by a
sudden, strange, fierce anger that swept over him. He felt outraged and
hurt to the death; he felt as if he had been cheated out of something
incalculably precious--as if sacrilege had been done to his most holy
sanctuary of emotion. White, tense with his anger, he looked at her and
spoke, his lips as pale as if his fiery words scathed them.

"How dare you? You have spied on me--you have crept in and listened! How
dare you? Do you know what you have done, girl? You have destroyed all
that made life worth while to me. My dream is dead. It could not live
when it was betrayed. And it was all I had. Oh, laugh at me--mock me! I
know that I am ridiculous! What of it? It never could have hurt you! Why
must you creep in like this to hear me and put me to shame? Oh, I love
you--I will say it, laugh as you will. Is it such a strange thing that I
should have a heart like other men? This will make sport for you! I, who
love you better than my life, better than any other man in the world
can love you, will be a jest to you all your life. I love you--and yet
I think I could hate you--you have destroyed my dream--you have done me
deadly wrong."

"Jasper! Jasper!" cried Alice, finding her voice. His anger hurt her
with a pain she could not endure. It was unbearable that Jasper should
be angry with her. In that moment she realized that she loved him--that
the words he had spoken when unconscious of her presence were the
sweetest she had ever heard, or ever could hear. Nothing mattered at
all, save that he loved her and was angry with her.

"Don't say such dreadful things to me," she stammered, "I did not
mean to listen. I could not help it. I shall never laugh at you. Oh,
Jasper"--she looked bravely at him and the fine soul of her shone
through the flesh like an illuminating lamp--"I am glad that you love
me! and I am glad I chanced to overhear you, since you would never have
had the courage to tell me otherwise. Glad--glad! Do you understand,
Jasper?"

Jasper looked at her with the eyes of one who, looking through pain,
sees rapture beyond.

"Is it possible?" he said, wonderingly. "Alice--I am so much older
than you--and they call me the Awkward Man--they say I am unlike other
people"--

"You ARE unlike other people," she said softly, "and that is why I love
you. I know now that I must have loved you ever since I saw you."

"I loved you long before I saw you," said Jasper.

He came close to her and drew her into his arms, tenderly and
reverently, all his shyness and awkwardness swallowed up in the grace
of his great happiness. In the old garden he kissed her lips and Alice
entered into her own.




CHAPTER XXVI. UNCLE BLAIR COMES HOME


It happened that the Story Girl and I both got up very early on the
morning of the Awkward Man's wedding day. Uncle Alec was going to
Charlottetown that day, and I, awakened at daybreak by the sounds in the
kitchen beneath us, remembered that I had forgotten to ask him to bring
me a certain school-book I wanted. So I hurriedly dressed and hastened
down to tell him before he went. I was joined on the stairs by the Story
Girl, who said she had wakened and, not feeling like going to sleep
again, thought she might as well get up.

"I had such a funny dream last night," she said. "I dreamed that I heard
a voice calling me from away down in Uncle Stephen's Walk--'Sara, Sara,
Sara,' it kept calling. I didn't know whose it was, and yet it seemed
like a voice I knew. I wakened up while it was calling, and it seemed so
real I could hardly believe it was a dream. It was bright moonlight,
and I felt just like getting up and going out to the orchard. But I knew
that would be silly and of course I didn't go. But I kept on wanting to
and I couldn't sleep any more. Wasn't it queer?"

When Uncle Alec had gone I proposed a saunter to the farther end of the
orchard, where I had left a book the preceding evening. A young mom was
walking rosily on the hills as we passed down Uncle Stephen's Walk,
with Paddy trotting before us. High overhead was the spirit-like blue of
paling skies; the east was a great arc of crystal, smitten through with
auroral crimsonings; just above it was one milk-white star of morning,
like a pearl on a silver sea. A light wind of dawn was weaving an orient
spell.

"It's lovely to be up as early as this, isn't it?" said the Story Girl.
"The world seems so different just at sunrise, doesn't it? It makes me
feel just like getting up to see the sun rise every morning of my
life after this. But I know I won't. I'll likely sleep later than ever
tomorrow morning. But I wish I could."

"The Awkward Man and Miss Reade are going to have a lovely day for their
wedding," I said.

"Yes, and I'm so glad. Beautiful Alice deserves everything good. Why,
Bev--why, Bev! Who is that in the hammock?"

I looked. The hammock was swung under the two end trees of the Walk. In
it a man was lying, asleep, his head pillowed on his overcoat. He was
sleeping easily, lightly, and wholesomely. He had a pointed brown beard
and thick wavy brown hair. His cheeks were a dusky red and the lashes of
his closed eyes were as long and dark and silken as a girl's. He wore a
light gray suit, and on the slender white hand that hung down over the
hammock's edge was a spark of diamond fire.

It seemed to me that I knew his face, although assuredly I had never
seen him before. While I groped among vague speculations the Story Girl
gave a queer, choked little cry. The next moment she had sprung over the
intervening space, dropped on her knees by the hammock, and flung her
arms about the man's neck.

"Father! Father!" she cried, while I stood, rooted to the ground in my
amazement.

The sleeper stirred and opened two large, exceedingly brilliant hazel
eyes. For a moment he gazed rather blankly at the brown-curled young
lady who was embracing him. Then a most delightful smile broke over his
face; he sprang up and caught her to his heart.

"Sara--Sara--my little Sara! To think didn't know you at first glance!
But you are almost a woman. And when I saw you last you were just a
little girl of eight. My own little Sara!"

"Father--father--sometimes I've wondered if you were ever coming back to
me," I heard the Story Girl say, as I turned and scuttled up the Walk,
realizing that I was not wanted there just then and would be little
missed. Various emotions and speculations possessed my mind in my
retreat; but chiefly did I feel a sense of triumph in being the bearer
of exciting news.

"Aunt Janet, Uncle Blair is here," I announced breathlessly at the
kitchen door.

Aunt Janet, who was kneading her bread, turned round and lifted floury
hands. Felicity and Cecily, who were just entering the kitchen, rosy
from slumber, stopped still and stared at me.

"Uncle who?" exclaimed Aunt Janet.

"Uncle Blair--the Story Girl's father, you know. He's here."

"WHERE?"

"Down in the orchard. He was asleep in the hammock. We found him there."

"Dear me!" said Aunt Janet, sitting down helplessly. "If that isn't
like Blair! Of course he couldn't come like anybody else. I wonder," she
added in a tone unheard by anyone else save myself, "I wonder if he has
come to take the child away."

My elation went out like a snuffed candle. I had never thought of this.
If Uncle Blair took the Story Girl away would not life become rather
savourless on the hill farm? I turned and followed Felicity and Cecily
out in a very subdued mood.

Uncle Blair and the Story Girl were just coming out of the orchard. His
arm was about her and hers was on his shoulder. Laughter and tears were
contending in her eyes. Only once before--when Peter had come back from
the Valley of the Shadow--had I seen the Story Girl cry. Emotion had to
go very deep with her ere it touched the source of tears. I had always
known that she loved her father passionately, though she rarely talked
of him, understanding that her uncles and aunts were not whole-heartedly
his friends.

But Aunt Janet's welcome was cordial enough, though a trifle flustered.
Whatever thrifty, hard-working farmer folk might think of gay, Bohemian
Blair Stanley in his absence, in his presence even they liked him, by
the grace of some winsome, lovable quality in the soul of him. He had
"a way with him"--revealed even in the manner with which he caught staid
Aunt Janet in his arms, swung her matronly form around as though she had
been a slim schoolgirl, and kissed her rosy cheek.

"Sister o' mine, are you never going to grow old?" he said. "Here you
are at forty-five with the roses of sixteen--and not a gray hair, I'll
wager."

"Blair, Blair, it is you who are always young," laughed Aunt Janet, not
ill pleased. "Where in the world did you come from? And what is this I
hear of your sleeping all night in the hammock?"

"I've been painting in the Lake District all summer, as you know,"
answered Uncle Blair, "and one day I just got homesick to see my little
girl. So I sailed for Montreal without further delay. I got here at
eleven last night--the station-master's son drove me down. Nice boy. The
old house was in darkness and I thought it would be a shame to rouse you
all out of bed after a hard day's work. So I decided that I would spend
the night in the orchard. It was moonlight, you know, and moonlight in
an old orchard is one of the few things left over from the Golden Age."

"It was very foolish of you," said practical Aunt Janet. "These
September nights are real chilly. You might have caught your death of
cold--or a bad dose of rheumatism."

"So I might. No doubt it was foolish of me," agreed Uncle Blair gaily.
"It must have been the fault, of the moonlight. Moonlight, you know,
Sister Janet, has an intoxicating quality. It is a fine, airy, silver
wine, such as fairies may drink at their revels, unharmed of it; but
when a mere mortal sips of it, it mounts straightway to his brain, to
the undoing of his daylight common sense. However, I have got neither
cold nor rheumatism, as a sensible person would have done had he ever
been lured into doing such a non-sensible thing; there is a special
Providence for us foolish folk. I enjoyed my night in the orchard; for
a time I was companioned by sweet old memories; and then I fell asleep
listening to the murmurs of the wind in those old trees yonder. And I
had a beautiful dream, Janet. I dreamed that the old orchard blossomed
again, as it did that spring eighteen years ago. I dreamed that its
sunshine was the sunshine of spring, not autumn. There was newness of
life in my dream, Janet, and the sweetness of forgotten words."

"Wasn't it strange about MY dream?" whispered the Story Girl to me.

"Well, you'd better come in and have some breakfast," said Aunt Janet.
"These are my little girls--Felicity and Cecily."

"I remember them as two most adorable tots," said Uncle Blair, shaking
hands. "They haven't changed quite so much as my own baby-child. Why,
she's a woman, Janet--she's a woman."

"She's child enough still," said Aunt Janet hastily.

The Story Girl shook her long brown curls.

"I'm fifteen," she said. "And you ought to see me in my long dress,
father."

"We must not be separated any longer, dear heart," I heard Uncle Blair
say tenderly. I hoped that he meant he would stay in Canada--not that he
would take the Story Girl away.

Apart from this we had a gay day with Uncle Blair. He evidently liked
our society better than that of the grown-ups, for he was a child
himself at heart, gay, irresponsible, always acting on the impulse of
the moment. We all found him a delightful companion. There was no
school that day, as Mr. Perkins was absent, attending a meeting of
the Teachers' Convention, so we spent most of its golden hours in the
orchard with Uncle Blair, listening to his fascinating accounts of
foreign wanderings. He also drew all our pictures for us, and this was
especially delightful, for the day of the camera was only just dawning
and none of us had ever had even our photographs taken. Sara Ray's
pleasure was, as usual, quite spoiled by wondering what her mother
would say of it, for Mrs. Ray had, so it appeared, some very peculiar
prejudices against the taking or making of any kind of picture
whatsoever, owing to an exceedingly strict interpretation of the second
commandment. Dan suggested that she need not tell her mother anything
about it; but Sara shook her head.

"I'll have to tell her. I've made it a rule to tell ma everything I do
ever since the Judgment Day."

"Besides," added Cecily seriously, "the Family Guide says one ought to
tell one's mother everything."

"It's pretty hard sometimes, though," sighed Sara. "Ma scolds so much
when I do tell her things, that it sort of discourages me. But when I
think of how dreadful I felt the time of the Judgment Day over deceiving
her in some things it nerves me up. I'd do almost anything rather than
feel like that the next time the Judgment Day comes."

"Fe, fi, fo, fum, I smell a story," said Uncle Blair. "What do you mean
by speaking of the Judgment Day in the past tense?"

The Story Girl told him the tale of that dreadful Sunday in the
preceding summer and we all laughed with him at ourselves.

"All the same," muttered Peter, "I don't want to have another experience
like that. I hope I'll be dead the next time the Judgment Day comes."

"But you'll be raised up for it," said Felix.

"Oh, that'll be all right. I won't mind that. I won't know anything
about it till it really happens. It's the expecting it that's the
worst."

"I don't think you ought to talk of such things," said Felicity.

When evening came we all went to Golden Milestone. We knew the Awkward
Man and his bride were expected home at sunset, and we meant to scatter
flowers on the path by which she must enter her new home. It was the
Story Girl's idea, but I don't think Aunt Janet would have let us go if
Uncle Blair had not pleaded for us. He asked to be taken along, too, and
we agreed, if he would stand out of sight when the newly married pair
came home.

"You see, father, the Awkward Man won't mind us, because we're only
children and he knows us well," explained the Story Girl, "but if
he sees you, a stranger, it might confuse him and we might spoil the
homecoming, and that would be such a pity."

So we went to Golden Milestone, laden with all the flowery spoil we
could plunder from both gardens. It was a clear amber-tinted September
evening and far away, over Markdale Harbour, a great round red moon
was rising as we waited. Uncle Blair was hidden behind the wind-blown
tassels of the pines at the gate, but he and the Story Girl kept waving
their hands at each other and calling out gay, mirthful jests.

"Do you really feel acquainted with your father?" whispered Sara Ray
wonderingly. "It's long since you saw him."

"If I hadn't seen him for a hundred years it wouldn't make any
difference that way," laughed the Story Girl.

"S-s-h-s-s-h--they're coming," whispered Felicity excitedly.

And then they came--Beautiful Alice blushing and lovely, in the
prettiest of pretty blue dresses, and the Awkward Man, so fervently
happy that he quite forgot to be awkward. He lifted her out of the buggy
gallantly and led her forward to us, smiling. We retreated before them,
scattering our flowers lavishly on the path, and Alice Dale walked to
the very doorstep of her new home over a carpet of blossoms. On the
step they both paused and turned towards us, and we shyly did the proper
thing in the way of congratulations and good wishes.

"It was so sweet of you to do this," said the smiling bride.

"It was lovely to be able to do it for you, dearest," whispered the
Story Girl, "and oh, Miss Reade--Mrs. Dale, I mean--we all hope you'll
be so, so happy for ever."

"I am sure I shall," said Alice Dale, turning to her husband. He looked
down into her eyes--and we were quite forgotten by both of them. We saw
it, and slipped away, while Jasper Dale drew his wife into their home
and shut the world out.

We scampered joyously away through the moonlit dusk. Uncle Blair joined
us at the gate and the Story Girl asked him what he thought of the
bride.

"When she dies white violets will grow out of her dust," he answered.

"Uncle Blair says even queerer things than the Story Girl," Felicity
whispered to me.

And so that beautiful day went away from us, slipping through our
fingers as we tried to hold it. It hooded itself in shadows and fared
forth on the road that is lighted by the white stars of evening. It had
been a gift of Paradise. Its hours had all been fair and beloved. From
dawn flush to fall of night there had been naught to mar it. It took
with it its smiles and laughter. But it left the boon of memory.




CHAPTER XXVII. THE OLD ORDER CHANGETH


"I am going away with father when he goes. He is going to spend the
winter in Paris, and I am to go to school there."

The Story Girl told us this one day in the orchard. There was a little
elation in her tone, but more regret. The news was not a great surprise
to us. We had felt it in the air ever since Uncle Blair's arrival. Aunt
Janet had been very unwilling to let the Story Girl go. But Uncle Blair
was inexorable. It was time, he said, that she should go to a better
school than the little country one in Carlisle; and besides, he did not
want her to grow into womanhood a stranger to him. So it was finally
decided that she was to go.

"Just think, you are going to Europe," said Sara Ray in an awe-struck
tone. "Won't that be splendid!"

"I suppose I'll like it after a while," said the Story Girl slowly,
"but I know I'll be dreadfully homesick at first. Of course, it will be
lovely to be with father, but oh, I'll miss the rest of you so much!"

"Just think how WE'LL miss YOU," sighed Cecily. "It will be so lonesome
here this winter, with you and Peter both gone. Oh, dear, I do wish
things didn't have to change."

Felicity said nothing. She kept looking down at the grass on which she
sat, absently pulling at the slender blades. Presently we saw two big
tears roll down over her cheeks. The Story Girl looked surprised.

"Are you crying because I'm going away, Felicity?" she asked.

"Of course I am," answered Felicity, with a big sob. "Do you think I've
no f-f-eeling?"

"I didn't think you'd care much," said the Story Girl frankly. "You've
never seemed to like me very much."

"I d-don't wear my h-heart on my sleeve," said poor Felicity, with an
attempt at dignity. "I think you m-might stay. Your father would let you
s-stay if you c-coaxed him."

"Well, you see I'd have to go some time," sighed the Story Girl,
"and the longer it was put off the harder it would be. But I do feel
dreadfully about it. I can't even take poor Paddy. I'll have to leave
him behind, and oh, I want you all to promise to be kind to him for my
sake."

We all solemnly assured her that we would.

"I'll g-give him cream every m-morning and n-night," sobbed Felicity,
"but I'll never be able to look at him without crying. He'll make me
think of you."

"Well, I'm not going right away," said the Story Girl, more cheerfully.
"Not till the last of October. So we have over a month yet to have a
good time in. Let's all just determine to make it a splendid month for
the last. We won't think about my going at all till we have to, and we
won't have any quarrels among us, and we'll just enjoy ourselves all we
possibly can. So don't cry any more, Felicity. I'm awfully glad you
do like me and am sorry I'm going away, but let's all forget it for a
month."

Felicity sighed, and tucked away her damp handkerchief.

"It isn't so easy for me to forget things, but I'll try," she said
disconsolately, "and if you want any more cooking lessons before you go
I'll be real glad to teach you anything I know."

This was a high plane of self-sacrifice for Felicity to attain. But the
Story Girl shook her head.

"No, I'm not going to bother my head about cooking lessons this last
month. It's too vexing."

"Do you remember the time you made the pudding--" began Peter, and
suddenly stopped.

"Out of sawdust?" finished the Story Girl cheerfully. "You needn't be
afraid to mention it to me after this. I don't mind any more. I begin to
see the fun of it now. I should think I do remember it--and the time I
baked the bread before it was raised enough."

"People have made worse mistakes than that," said Felicity kindly.

"Such as using tooth-powd--" but here Dan stopped abruptly, remembering
the Story Girl's plea for a beautiful month. Felicity coloured, but said
nothing--did not even LOOK anything.

"We HAVE had lots of fun together one way or another," said Cecily,
retrospectively.

"Just think how much we've laughed this last year or so," said the Story
Girl. "We've had good times together; but I think we'll have lots more
splendid years ahead."

"Eden is always behind us--Paradise always before," said Uncle
Blair, coming up in time to hear her. He said it with a sigh that was
immediately lost in one of his delightful smiles.

"I like Uncle Blair so much better than I expected to," Felicity
confided to me. "Mother says he's a rolling stone, but there really is
something very nice about him, although he says a great many things I
don't understand. I suppose the Story Girl will have a very gay time in
Paris."

"She's going to school and she'll have to study hard," I said.

"She says she's going to study for the stage," said Felicity. "Uncle
Roger thinks it is all right, and says she'll be very famous some day.
But mother thinks it's dreadful, and so do I."

"Aunt Julia is a concert singer," I said.

"Oh, that's very different. But I hope poor Sara will get on all right,"
sighed Felicity. "You never know what may happen to a person in those
foreign countries. And everybody says Paris is such a wicked place. But
we must hope for the best," she concluded in a resigned tone.

That evening the Story Girl and I drove the cows to pasture after
milking, and when we came home we sought out Uncle Blair in the orchard.
He was sauntering up and down Uncle Stephen's Walk, his hands clasped
behind him and his beautiful, youthful face uplifted to the western sky
where waves of night were breaking on a dim primrose shore of sunset.

"See that star over there in the south-west?" he said, as we joined him.
"The one just above that pine? An evening star shining over a dark
pine tree is the whitest thing in the universe--because it is LIVING
whiteness--whiteness possessing a soul. How full this old orchard is of
twilight! Do you know, I have been trysting here with ghosts."

"The Family Ghost?" I asked, very stupidly.

"No, not the Family Ghost. I never saw beautiful, broken-hearted Emily
yet. Your mother saw her once, Sara--that was a strange thing," he added
absently, as if to himself.

"Did mother really see her?" whispered the Story Girl.

"Well, she always believed she did. Who knows?"

"Do you think there are such things as ghosts, Uncle Blair?" I asked
curiously.

"I never saw any, Beverley."

"But you said you were trysting with ghosts here this evening," said the
Story Girl.

"Oh, yes--the ghosts of the old years. I love this orchard because of
its many ghosts. We are good comrades, those ghosts and I; we walk and
talk--we even laugh together--sorrowful laughter that has sorrow's own
sweetness. And always there comes to me one dear phantom and wanders
hand in hand with me--a lost lady of the old years."

"My mother?" said the Story Girl very softly.

"Yes, your mother. Here, in her old haunts, it is impossible for me to
believe that she can be dead--that her LAUGHTER can be dead. She was the
gayest, sweetest thing--and so young--only three years older than you,
Sara. Yonder old house had been glad because of her for eighteen years
when I met her first."

"I wish I could remember her," said the Story Girl, with a little sigh.
"I haven't even a picture of her. Why didn't you paint one, father?"

"She would never let me. She had some queer, funny, half-playful,
half-earnest superstition about it. But I always meant to when she would
become willing to let me. And then--she died. Her twin brother Felix
died the same day. There was something strange about that, too. I was
holding her in my arms and she was looking up at me; suddenly she looked
past me and gave a little start. 'Felix!' she said. For a moment
she trembled and then she smiled and looked up at me again a little
beseechingly. 'Felix has come for me, dear,' she said. 'We were always
together before you came--you must not mind--you must be glad I do not
have to go alone.' Well, who knows? But she left me, Sara--she left me."

There was that in Uncle Blair's voice that kept us silent for a time.
Then the Story Girl said, still very softly:

"What did mother look like, father? I don't look the least little bit
like her, do I?"

"No, I wish you did, you brown thing. Your mother's face was as white as
a wood-lily, with only a faint dream of rose in her cheeks. She had the
eyes of one who always had a song in her heart--blue as a mist, those
eyes were. She had dark lashes, and a little red mouth that quivered
when she was very sad or very happy like a crimson rose too rudely
shaken by the wind. She was as slim and lithe as a young, white-stemmed
birch tree. How I loved her! How happy we were! But he who accepts human
love must bind it to his soul with pain, and she is not lost to me.
Nothing is ever really lost to us as long as we remember it."

Uncle Blair looked up at the evening star. We saw that he had forgotten
us, and we slipped away, hand in hand, leaving him alone in the
memory-haunted shadows of the old orchard.




CHAPTER XXVIII. THE PATH TO ARCADY


October that year gathered up all the spilled sunshine of the summer and
clad herself in it as in a garment. The Story Girl had asked us to
try to make the last month together beautiful, and Nature seconded our
efforts, giving us that most beautiful of beautiful things--a gracious
and perfect moon of falling leaves. There was not in all that vanished
October one day that did not come in with auroral splendour and go out
attended by a fair galaxy of evening stars--not a day when there were
not golden lights in the wide pastures and purple hazes in the ripened
distances. Never was anything so gorgeous as the maple trees that year.
Maples are trees that have primeval fire in their souls. It glows out a
little in their early youth, before the leaves open, in the redness and
rosy-yellowness of their blossoms, but in summer it is carefully hidden
under a demure, silver-lined greenness. Then when autumn comes, the
maples give up trying to be sober and flame out in all the barbaric
splendour and gorgeousness of their real nature, making of the hills
things out of an Arabian Nights dream in the golden prime of good Haroun
Alraschid.

You may never know what scarlet and crimson really are until you see
them in their perfection on an October hillside, under the unfathomable
blue of an autumn sky. All the glow and radiance and joy at earth's
heart seem to have broken loose in a splendid determination to express
itself for once before the frost of winter chills her beating pulses. It
is the year's carnival ere the dull Lenten days of leafless valleys and
penitential mists come.

The time of apple-picking had come around once more and we worked
joyously. Uncle Blair picked apples with us, and between him and the
Story Girl it was an October never to be forgotten.

"Will you go far afield for a walk with me to-day?" he said to her and
me, one idle afternoon of opal skies, pied meadows and misty hills.

It was Saturday and Peter had gone home; Felix and Dan were helping
Uncle Alec top turnips; Cecily and Felicity were making cookies for
Sunday, so the Story Girl and I were alone in Uncle Stephen's Walk.

We liked to be alone together that last month, to think the long, long
thoughts of youth and talk about our futures. There had grown up between
us that summer a bond of sympathy that did not exist between us and the
others. We were older than they--the Story Girl was fifteen and I was
nearly that; and all at once it seemed as if we were immeasurably older
than the rest, and possessed of dreams and visions and forward-reaching
hopes which they could not possibly share or understand. At times we
were still children, still interested in childish things. But there came
hours when we seemed to our two selves very grown up and old, and
in those hours we talked our dreams and visions and hopes, vague and
splendid, as all such are, over together, and so began to build up, out
of the rainbow fragments of our childhood's companionship, that rare
and beautiful friendship which was to last all our lives, enriching and
enstarring them. For there is no bond more lasting than that formed by
the mutual confidences of that magic time when youth is slipping from
the sheath of childhood and beginning to wonder what lies for it beyond
those misty hills that bound the golden road.

"Where are you going?" asked the Story Girl.

"To 'the woods that belt the gray hillside'--ay, and overflow beyond it
into many a valley purple-folded in immemorial peace," answered Uncle
Blair. "I have a fancy for one more ramble in Prince Edward Island woods
before I leave Canada again. But I would not go alone. So come, you two
gay youthful things to whom all life is yet fair and good, and we will
seek the path to Arcady. There will be many little things along our
way to make us glad. Joyful sounds will 'come ringing down the wind;' a
wealth of gypsy gold will be ours for the gathering; we will learn the
potent, unutterable charm of a dim spruce wood and the grace of flexile
mountain ashes fringing a lonely glen; we will tryst with the folk of
fur and feather; we'll hearken to the music of gray old firs. Come, and
you'll have a ramble and an afternoon that you will both remember all
your lives."

We did have it; never has its remembrance faded; that idyllic afternoon
of roving in the old Carlisle woods with the Story Girl and Uncle Blair
gleams in my book of years, a page of living beauty. Yet it was but
a few hours of simplest pleasure; we wandered pathlessly through the
sylvan calm of those dear places which seemed that day to be full of
a great friendliness; Uncle Blair sauntered along behind us, whistling
softly; sometimes he talked to himself; we delighted in those brief
reveries of his; Uncle Blair was the only man I have ever known who
could, when he so willed, "talk like a book," and do it without seeming
ridiculous; perhaps it was because he had the knack of choosing "fit
audience, though few," and the proper time to appeal to that audience.

We went across the fields, intending to skirt the woods at the back of
Uncle Alec's farm and find a lane that cut through Uncle Roger's woods;
but before we came to it we stumbled on a sly, winding little path quite
by accident--if, indeed, there can be such a thing as accident in the
woods, where I am tempted to think we are led by the Good People along
such of their fairy ways as they have a mind for us to walk in.

"Go to, let us explore this," said Uncle Blair. "It always drags
terribly at my heart to go past a wood lane if I can make any excuse at
all for traversing it: for it is the by-ways that lead to the heart of
the woods and we must follow them if we would know the forest and be
known of it. When we can really feel its wild heart beating against ours
its subtle life will steal into our veins and make us its own for ever,
so that no matter where we go or how wide we wander in the noisy ways of
cities or over the lone ways of the sea, we shall yet be drawn back to
the forest to find our most enduring kinship."

"I always feel so SATISFIED in the woods," said the Story Girl dreamily,
as we turned in under the low-swinging fir boughs. "Trees seem such
friendly things."

"They are the most friendly things in God's good creation," said Uncle
Blair emphatically. "And it is so easy to live with them. To hold
converse with pines, to whisper secrets with the poplars, to listen to
the tales of old romance that beeches have to tell, to walk in eloquent
silence with self-contained firs, is to learn what real companionship
is. Besides, trees are the same all over the world. A beech tree on the
slopes of the Pyrenees is just what a beech tree here in these Carlisle
woods is; and there used to be an old pine hereabouts whose twin brother
I was well acquainted with in a dell among the Apennines. Listen to
those squirrels, will you, chattering over yonder. Did you ever hear
such a fuss over nothing? Squirrels are the gossips and busybodies of
the woods; they haven't learned the fine reserve of its other denizens.
But after all, there is a certain shrill friendliness in their
greeting."

"They seem to be scolding us," I said, laughing.

"Oh, they are not half such scolds as they sound," answered Uncle Blair
gaily. "If they would but 'tak a thought and mend' their shrew-like ways
they would be dear, lovable creatures enough."

"If I had to be an animal I think I'd like to be a squirrel," said the
Story Girl. "It must be next best thing to flying."

"Just see what a spring that fellow gave," laughed Uncle Blair. "And now
listen to his song of triumph! I suppose that chasm he cleared seemed as
wide and deep to him as Niagara Gorge would to us if we leaped over
it. Well, the wood people are a happy folk and very well satisfied with
themselves."

Those who have followed a dim, winding, balsamic path to the unexpected
hollow where a wood-spring lies have found the rarest secret the forest
can reveal. Such was our good fortune that day. At the end of our path
we found it, under the pines, a crystal-clear thing with lips unkissed
by so much as a stray sunbeam.

"It is easy to dream that this is one of the haunted springs of old
romance," said Uncle Blair. "'Tis an enchanted spot this, I am very
sure, and we should go softly, speaking low, lest we disturb the rest
of a white, wet naiad, or break some spell that has cost long years of
mystic weaving."

"It's so easy to believe things in the woods," said the Story Girl,
shaping a cup from a bit of golden-brown birch bark and filling it at
the spring.

"Drink a toast in that water, Sara," said Uncle Blair. "There's not a
doubt that it has some potent quality of magic in it and the wish you
wish over it will come true."

The Story Girl lifted her golden-hued flagon to her red lips. Her hazel
eyes laughed at us over the brim.

"Here's to our futures," she cried, "I wish that every day of our lives
may be better than the one that went before."

"An extravagant wish--a very wish of youth," commented Uncle Blair, "and
yet in spite of its extravagance, a wish that will come true if you are
true to yourselves. In that case, every day WILL be better than all that
went before--but there will be many days, dear lad and lass, when you
will not believe it."

We did not understand him, but we knew Uncle Blair never explained his
meaning. When asked it he was wont to answer with a smile, "Some day
you'll grow to it. Wait for that." So we addressed ourselves to follow
the brook that stole away from the spring in its windings and doublings
and tricky surprises.

"A brook," quoth Uncle Blair, "is the most changeful, bewitching,
lovable thing in the world. It is never in the same mind or mood two
minutes. Here it is sighing and murmuring as if its heart were broken.
But listen--yonder by the birches it is laughing as if it were enjoying
some capital joke all by itself."

It was indeed a changeful brook; here it would make a pool, dark and
brooding and still, where we bent to look at our mirrored faces; then it
grew communicative and gossiped shallowly over a broken pebble bed where
there was a diamond dance of sunbeams and no troutling or minnow could
glide through without being seen. Sometimes its banks were high and
steep, hung with slender ashes and birches; again they were mere, low
margins, green with delicate mosses, shelving out of the wood. Once
it came to a little precipice and flung itself over undauntedly in an
indignation of foam, gathering itself up rather dizzily among the mossy
stones below. It was some time before it got over its vexation; it went
boiling and muttering along, fighting with the rotten logs that lie
across it, and making far more fuss than was necessary over every root
that interfered with it. We were getting tired of its ill-humour and
talked of leaving it, when it suddenly grew sweet-tempered again,
swooped around a curve--and presto, we were in fairyland.

It was a little dell far in the heart of the woods. A row of birches
fringed the brook, and each birch seemed more exquisitely graceful
and golden than her sisters. The woods receded from it on every hand,
leaving it lying in a pool of amber sunshine. The yellow trees were
mirrored in the placid stream, with now and then a leaf falling on the
water, mayhap to drift away and be used, as Uncle Blair suggested, by
some adventurous wood sprite who had it in mind to fare forth to some
far-off, legendary region where all the brooks ran into the sea.

"Oh, what a lovely place!" I exclaimed, looking around me with delight.

"A spell of eternity is woven over it, surely," murmured Uncle Blair.
"Winter may not touch it, or spring ever revisit it. It should be like
this for ever."

"Let us never come here again," said the Story Girl softly, "never,
no matter how often we may be in Carlisle. Then we will never see it
changed or different. We can always remember it just as we see it now,
and it will be like this for ever for us."

"I'm going to sketch it," said Uncle Blair.

While he sketched it the Story Girl and I sat on the banks of the brook
and she told me the story of the Sighing Reed. It was a very simple
little story, that of the slender brown reed which grew by the forest
pool and always was sad and sighing because it could not utter music
like the brook and the birds and the winds. All the bright, beautiful
things around it mocked it and laughed at it for its folly. Who would
ever look for music in it, a plain, brown, unbeautiful thing? But one
day a youth came through the wood; he was as beautiful as the spring; he
cut the brown reed and fashioned it according to his liking; and then he
put it to his lips and breathed on it; and, oh, the music that floated
through the forest! It was so entrancing that everything--brooks and
birds and winds--grew silent to listen to it. Never had anything so
lovely been heard; it was the music that had for so long been shut up in
the soul of the sighing reed and was set free at last through its pain
and suffering.

I had heard the Story Girl tell many a more dramatic tale; but that one
stands out for me in memory above them all, partly, perhaps, because of
the spot in which she told it, partly because it was the last one I was
to hear her tell for many years--the last one she was ever to tell me on
the golden road.

When Uncle Blair had finished his sketch the shafts of sunshine were
turning crimson and growing more and more remote; the early autumn
twilight was falling over the woods. We left our dell, saying good-bye
to it for ever, as the Story Girl had suggested, and we went slowly
homeward through the fir woods, where a haunting, indescribable odour
stole out to meet us.

"There is magic in the scent of dying fir," Uncle Blair was saying aloud
to himself, as if forgetting he was not quite alone. "It gets into
our blood like some rare, subtly-compounded wine, and thrills us with
unutterable sweetnesses, as of recollections from some other fairer
life, lived in some happier star. Compared to it, all other scents seem
heavy and earth-born, luring to the valleys instead of the heights. But
the tang of the fir summons onward and upward to some 'far-off, divine
event'--some spiritual peak of attainment whence we shall see with
unfaltering, unclouded vision the spires of some aerial City Beautiful,
or the fulfilment of some fair, fadeless land of promise."

He was silent for a moment, then added in a lower tone,

"Felicity, you loved the scent of dying fir. If you were here tonight
with me--Felicity--Felicity!"

Something in his voice made me suddenly sad. I was comforted when I felt
the Story Girl slip her hand into mine. So we walked out of the woods
into the autumn dusk.

We were in a little valley. Half-way up the opposite slope a brush fire
was burning clearly and steadily in a maple grove. There was something
indescribably alluring in that fire, glowing so redly against the dark
background of forest and twilit hill.

"Let us go to it," cried Uncle Blair, gaily, casting aside his sorrowful
mood and catching our hands. "A wood fire at night has a fascination not
to be resisted by those of mortal race. Hasten--we must not lose time."

"Oh, it will burn a long time yet," I gasped, for Uncle Blair was
whisking us up the hill at a merciless rate.

"You can't be sure. It may have been lighted by some good, honest
farmer-man, bent on tidying up his sugar orchard, but it may also, for
anything we know, have been kindled by no earthly woodman as a beacon or
summons to the tribes of fairyland, and may vanish away if we tarry."

It did not vanish and presently we found ourselves in the grove. It was
very beautiful; the fire burned with a clear, steady glow and a soft
crackle; the long arcades beneath the trees were illuminated with a
rosy radiance, beyond which lurked companies of gray and purple shadows.
Everything was very still and dreamy and remote.

"It is impossible that out there, just over the hill, lies a village of
men, where tame household lamps are shining," said Uncle Blair.

"I feel as if we must be thousands of miles away from everything we've
ever known," murmured the Story Girl.

"So you are!" said Uncle Blair emphatically. "You're back in the youth
of the race--back in the beguilement of the young world. Everything
is in this hour--the beauty of classic myths, the primal charm of the
silent and the open, the lure of mystery. Why, it's a time and place
when and where everything might come true--when the men in green might
creep out to join hands and dance around the fire, or dryads steal from
their trees to warm their white limbs, grown chilly in October frosts,
by the blaze. I wouldn't be much surprised if we should see something
of the kind. Isn't that the flash of an ivory shoulder through yonder
gloom? And didn't you see a queer little elfin face peering at us around
that twisted gray trunk? But one can't be sure. Mortal eyesight is too
slow and clumsy a thing to match against the flicker of a pixy-litten
fire."

Hand in hand we wandered through that enchanted place, seeking the folk
of elf-land, "and heard their mystic voices calling, from fairy knoll
and haunted hill." Not till the fire died down into ashes did we leave
the grove. Then we found that the full moon was gleaming lustrously from
a cloudless sky across the valley. Between us and her stretched up a
tall pine, wondrously straight and slender and branchless to its very
top, where it overflowed in a crest of dark boughs against the silvery
splendour behind it. Beyond, the hill farms were lying in a suave, white
radiance.

"Doesn't it seem a long, long time to you since we left home this
afternoon?" asked the Story Girl. "And yet it is only a few hours."

Only a few hours--true; yet such hours were worth a cycle of common
years untouched by the glory and the dream.




CHAPTER XXIX. WE LOSE A FRIEND


Our beautiful October was marred by one day of black tragedy--the day
Paddy died. For Paddy, after seven years of as happy a life as ever
a cat lived, died suddenly--of poison, as was supposed. Where he had
wandered in the darkness to meet his doom we did not know, but in the
frosty dawnlight he dragged himself home to die. We found him lying
on the doorstep when we got up, and it did not need Aunt Janet's curt
announcement, or Uncle Blair's reluctant shake of the head, to tell us
that there was no chance of our pet recovering this time. We felt that
nothing could be done. Lard and sulphur on his paws would be of no use,
nor would any visit to Peg Bowen avail. We stood around in mournful
silence; the Story Girl sat down on the step and took poor Paddy upon
her lap.

"I s'pose there's no use even in praying now," said Cecily desperately.

"It wouldn't do any harm to try," sobbed Felicity.

"You needn't waste your prayers," said Dan mournfully, "Pat is beyond
human aid. You can tell that by his eyes. Besides, I don't believe it
was the praying cured him last time."

"No, it was Peg Bowen," declared Peter, "but she couldn't have bewitched
him this time for she's been away for months, nobody knows where."

"If he could only TELL us where he feels the worst!" said Cecily
piteously. "It's so dreadful to see him suffering and not be able to do
a single thing to help him!"

"I don't think he's suffering much now," I said comfortingly.

The Story Girl said nothing. She passed and repassed her long brown hand
gently over her pet's glossy fur. Pat lifted his head and essayed to
creep a little nearer to his beloved mistress. The Story Girl drew his
limp body close in her arms. There was a plaintive little mew--a long
quiver--and Paddy's friendly soul had fared forth to wherever it is that
good cats go.

"Well, he's gone," said Dan, turning his back abruptly to us.

"It doesn't seem as if it can be true," sobbed Cecily. "This time
yesterday morning he was full of life."

"He drank two full saucers of cream," moaned Felicity, "and I saw him
catch a mouse in the evening. Maybe it was the last one he ever caught."

"He did for many a mouse in his day," said Peter, anxious to pay his
tribute to the departed.

"'He was a cat--take him for all in all. We shall not look upon his like
again,'" quoted Uncle Blair.

Felicity and Cecily and Sara Ray cried so much that Aunt Janet lost
patience completely and told them sharply that they would have something
to cry for some day--which did not seem to comfort them much. The Story
Girl shed no tears, though the look in her eyes hurt more than weeping.

"After all, perhaps it's for the best," she said drearily. "I've been
feeling so badly over having to go away and leave Paddy. No matter how
kind you'd all be to him I know he'd miss me terribly. He wasn't like
most cats who don't care who comes and goes as long as they get plenty
to eat. Paddy wouldn't have been contented without me."

"Oh, no-o-o, oh, no-o-o," wailed Sara Ray lugubriously.

Felix shot a disgusted glance at her.

"I don't see what YOU are making such a fuss about," he said
unfeelingly. "He wasn't your cat."

"But I l-l-oved him," sobbed Sara, "and I always feel bad when my
friends d-do."

"I wish we could believe that cats went to heaven, like people," sighed
Cecily. "Do you really think it isn't possible?"

Uncle Blair shook his head.

"I'm afraid not. I'd like to think cats have a chance for heaven, but I
can't. There's nothing heavenly about cats, delightful creatures though
they are."

"Blair, I'm really surprised to hear the things you say to the
children," said Aunt Janet severely.

"Surely you wouldn't prefer me to tell them that cats DO go to heaven,"
protested Uncle Blair.

"I think it's wicked to carry on about an animal as those children do,"
answered Aunt Janet decidedly, "and you shouldn't encourage them. Here
now, children, stop making a fuss. Bury that cat and get off to your
apple picking."

We had to go to our work, but Paddy was not to be buried in any such
off-hand fashion as that. It was agreed that we should bury him in
the orchard at sunset that evening, and Sara Ray, who had to go home,
declared she would be back for it, and implored us to wait for her if
she didn't come exactly on time.

"I mayn't be able to get away till after milking," she sniffed, "but I
don't want to miss it. Even a cat's funeral is better than none at all."

"Horrid thing!" said Felicity, barely waiting until Sara was out of
earshot.

We worked with heavy hearts that day; the girls cried bitterly most of
the time and we boys whistled defiantly. But as evening drew on we began
to feel a sneaking interest in the details of the funeral. As Dan said,
the thing should be done properly, since Paddy was no common cat. The
Story Girl selected the spot for the grave, in a little corner behind
the cherry copse, where early violets enskied the grass in spring, and
we boys dug the grave, making it "soft and narrow," as the heroine of
the old ballad wanted hers made. Sara Ray, who managed to come in time
after all, and Felicity stood and watched us, but Cecily and the Story
Girl kept far aloof.

"This time last night you never thought you'd be digging Pat's grave
to-night," sighed Felicity.

"We little k-know what a day will bring forth," sobbed Sara. "I've heard
the minister say that and it is true."

"Of course it's true. It's in the Bible; but I don't think you should
repeat it in connection with a cat," said Felicity dubiously.

When all was in readiness the Story Girl brought her pet through the
orchard where he had so often frisked and prowled. No useless coffin
enclosed his breast but he reposed in a neat cardboard box.

"I wonder if it would be right to say 'ashes to ashes and dust to
dust,'" said Peter.

"No, it wouldn't," averred Felicity. "It would be real wicked."

"I think we ought to sing a hymn, anyway," asseverated Sara Ray.

"Well, we might do that, if it isn't a very religious one," conceded
Felicity.

"How would 'Pull for the shore, sailor, pull for the shore,' do?" asked
Cecily. "That never seemed to me a very religious hymn."

"But it doesn't seem very appropriate to a funeral occasion either,"
said Felicity.

"I think 'Lead, kindly light,' would be ever so much more suitable,"
suggested Sara Ray, "and it is kind of soothing and melancholy too."

"We are not going to sing anything," said the Story Girl coldly. "Do
you want to make the affair ridiculous? We will just fill up the grave
quietly and put a flat stone over the top."

"It isn't much like my idea of a funeral," muttered Sara Ray
discontentedly.

"Never mind, we're going to have a real obituary about him in Our
Magazine," whispered Cecily consolingly.

"And Peter is going to cut his name on top of the stone," added
Felicity. "Only we mustn't let on to the grown-ups until it is done,
because they might say it wasn't right."

We left the orchard, a sober little band, with the wind of the gray
twilight blowing round us. Uncle Roger passed us at the gate.

"So the last sad obsequies are over?" he remarked with a grin.

And we hated Uncle Roger. But we loved Uncle Blair because he said
quietly,

"And so you've buried your little comrade?"

So much may depend on the way a thing is said. But not even Uncle
Blair's sympathy could take the sting out of the fact that there was
no Paddy to get the froth that night at milking time. Felicity cried
bitterly all the time she was straining the milk. Many human beings have
gone to their graves unattended by as much real regret as followed that
one gray pussy cat to his.




CHAPTER XXX. PROPHECIES


"Here's a letter for you from father," said Felix, tossing it to me as
he came through the orchard gate. We had been picking apples all day,
but were taking a mid-afternoon rest around the well, with a cup of its
sparkling cold water to refresh us.

I opened the letter rather indifferently, for father, with all his
excellent and lovable traits, was but a poor correspondent; his letters
were usually very brief and very unimportant.

This letter was brief enough, but it was freighted with a message of
weighty import. I sat gazing stupidly at the sheet after I had read it
until Felix exclaimed,

"Bev, what's the matter with you? What's in that letter?"

"Father is coming home," I said dazedly. "He is to leave South America
in a fortnight and will be here in November to take us back to Toronto."

Everybody gasped. Sara Ray, of course, began to cry, which aggravated me
unreasonably.

"Well," said Felix, when he got his second wind, "I'll be awful glad
to see father again, but I tell you I don't like the thought of leaving
here."

I felt exactly the same but, in view of Sara Ray's tears, admit it I
would not; so I sat in grum silence while the other tongues wagged.

"If I were not going away myself I'd feel just terrible," said the Story
Girl. "Even as it is I'm real sorry. I'd like to be able to think of
you as all here together when I'm gone, having good times and writing me
about them."

"It'll be awfully dull when you fellows go," muttered Dan.

"I'm sure I don't know what we're ever going to do here this winter,"
said Felicity, with the calmness of despair.

"Thank goodness there are no more fathers to come back," breathed Cecily
with a vicious earnestness that made us all laugh, even in the midst of
our dismay.

We worked very half-heartedly the rest of the day, and it was not until
we assembled in the orchard in the evening that our spirits recovered
something like their wonted level. It was clear and slightly frosty; the
sun had declined behind a birch on a distant hill and it seemed a tree
with a blazing heart of fire. The great golden willow at the lane gate
was laughter-shaken in the wind of evening. Even amid all the changes of
our shifting world we could not be hopelessly low-spirited--except Sara
Ray, who was often so, and Peter, who was rarely so. But Peter had been
sorely vexed in spirit for several days. The time was approaching for
the October issue of Our Magazine and he had no genuine fiction ready
for it. He had taken so much to heart Felicity's taunt that his stories
were all true that he had determined to have a really-truly false one
in the next number. But the difficulty was to get anyone to write it. He
had asked the Story Girl to do it, but she refused; then he appealed to
me and I shirked. Finally Peter determined to write a story himself.

"It oughtn't to be any harder than writing a poem and I managed that,"
he said dolefully.

He worked at it in the evenings in the granary loft, and the rest of us
forebore to question him concerning it, because he evidently disliked
talking about his literary efforts. But this evening I had to ask him if
he would soon have it ready, as I wanted to make up the paper.

"It's done," said Peter, with an air of gloomy triumph. "It don't amount
to much, but anyhow I made it all out of my own head. Not one word of it
was ever printed or told before, and nobody can say there was."

"Then I guess we have all the stuff in and I'll have Our Magazine ready
to read by tomorrow night," I said.

"I s'pose it will be the last one we'll have," sighed Cecily. "We can't
carry it on after you all go, and it has been such fun."

"Bev will be a real newspaper editor some day," declared the Story Girl,
on whom the spirit of prophecy suddenly descended that night.

She was swinging on the bough of an apple tree, with a crimson shawl
wrapped about her head, and her eyes were bright with roguish fire.

"How do you know he will?" asked Felicity.

"Oh, I can tell futures," answered the Story Girl mysteriously. "I know
what's going to happen to all of you. Shall I tell you?"

"Do, just for the fun of it," I said. "Then some day we'll know just how
near you came to guessing right. Go on. What else about me?"

"You'll write books, too, and travel all over the world," continued the
Story Girl. "Felix will be fat to the end of his life, and he will be a
grandfather before he is fifty, and he will wear a long black beard."

"I won't," cried Felix disgustedly. "I hate whiskers. Maybe I can't help
the grandfather part, but I CAN help having a beard."

"You can't. It's written in the stars."

"'Tain't. The stars can't prevent me from shaving."

"Won't Grandpa Felix sound awful funny?" reflected Felicity.

"Peter will be a minister," went on the Story Girl.

"Well, I might be something worse," remarked Peter, in a not ungratified
tone.

"Dan will be a farmer and will marry a girl whose name begins with K and
he will have eleven children. And he'll vote Grit."

"I won't," cried scandalized Dan. "You don't know a thing about
it. Catch ME ever voting Grit! As for the rest of it--I don't care.
Farming's well enough, though I'd rather be a sailor."

"Don't talk such nonsense," protested Felicity sharply. "What on earth
do you want to be a sailor for and be drowned?"

"All sailors aren't drowned," said Dan.

"Most of them are. Look at Uncle Stephen."

"You ain't sure he was drowned."

"Well, he disappeared, and that is worse."

"How do you know? Disappearing might be real easy."

"It's not very easy for your family."

"Hush, let's hear the rest of the predictions," said Cecily.

"Felicity," resumed the Story Girl gravely, "will marry a minister."

Sara Ray giggled and Felicity blushed. Peter tried hard not to look too
self-consciously delighted.

"She will be a perfect housekeeper and will teach a Sunday School class
and be very happy all her life."

"Will her husband be happy?" queried Dan solemnly.

"I guess he'll be as happy as your wife," retorted Felicity reddening.

"He'll be the happiest man in the world," declared Peter warmly.

"What about me?" asked Sara Ray.

The Story Girl looked rather puzzled. It was so hard to imagine Sara Ray
as having any kind of future. Yet Sara was plainly anxious to have her
fortune told and must be gratified.

"You'll be married," said the Story Girl recklessly, "and you'll live to
be nearly a hundred years old, and go to dozens of funerals and have a
great many sick spells. You will learn not to cry after you are seventy;
but your husband will never go to church."

"I'm glad you warned me," said Sara Ray solemnly, "because now I know
I'll make him promise before I marry him that he will go."

"He won't keep the promise," said the Story Girl, shaking her head. "But
it is getting cold and Cecily is coughing. Let us go in."

"You haven't told my fortune," protested Cecily disappointedly.

The Story Girl looked very tenderly at Cecily--at the smooth little
brown head, at the soft, shining eyes, at the cheeks that were often
over-rosy after slight exertion, at the little sunburned hands that were
always busy doing faithful work or quiet kindnesses. A very strange look
came over the Story Girl's face; her eyes grew sad and far-reaching, as
if of a verity they pierced beyond the mists of hidden years.

"I couldn't tell any fortune half good enough for you, dearest," she
said, slipping her arm round Cecily. "You deserve everything good and
lovely. But you know I've only been in fun--of course I don't know
anything about what's going to happen to us."

"Perhaps you know more than you think for," said Sara Ray, who seemed
much pleased with her fortune and anxious to believe it, despite the
husband who wouldn't go to church.

"But I'd like to be told my fortune, even in fun," persisted Cecily.

"Everybody you meet will love you as long as you live." said the Story
Girl. "There that's the very nicest fortune I can tell you, and it will
come true whether the others do or not, and now we must go in."

We went, Cecily still a little disappointed. In later years I often
wondered why the Story Girl refused to tell her fortune that night.
Did some strange gleam of foreknowledge fall for a moment across her
mirth-making? Did she realize in a flash of prescience that there was
no earthly future for our sweet Cecily? Not for her were to be the
lengthening shadows or the fading garland. The end was to come while
the rainbow still sparkled on her wine of life, ere a single petal had
fallen from her rose of joy. Long life was before all the others who
trysted that night in the old homestead orchard; but Cecily's maiden
feet were never to leave the golden road.




CHAPTER XXXI. THE LAST NUMBER OF OUR MAGAZINE


EDITORIAL

It is with heartfelt regret that we take up our pen to announce that
this will be the last number of Our Magazine. We have edited ten numbers
of it and it has been successful beyond our expectations. It has to be
discontinued by reason of circumstances over which we have no control
and not because we have lost interest in it. Everybody has done his or
her best for Our Magazine. Prince Edward Island expected everyone to do
his and her duty and everyone did it.

Mr. Dan King conducted the etiquette department in a way worthy of the
Family Guide itself. He is especially entitled to commendation because
he laboured under the disadvantage of having to furnish most of the
questions as well as the answers. Miss Felicity King has edited our
helpful household department very ably, and Miss Cecily King's fashion
notes were always up to date. The personal column was well looked after
by Miss Sara Stanley and the story page has been a marked success under
the able management of Mr. Peter Craig, to whose original story in
this issue, "The Battle of the Partridge Eggs," we would call especial
attention. The Exciting Adventure series has also been very popular.

And now, in closing, we bid farewell to our staff and thank them one and
all for their help and co-operation in the past year. We have enjoyed
our work and we trust that they have too. We wish them all happiness
and success in years to come, and we hope that the recollection of
Our Magazine will not be held least dear among the memories of their
childhood.

(SOBS FROM THE GIRLS): "INDEED IT WON'T!"


OBITUARY

On October eighteenth, Patrick Grayfur departed for that bourne whence
no traveller returns. He was only a cat, but he had been our faithful
friend for a long time and we aren't ashamed to be sorry for him. There
are lots of people who are not as friendly and gentlemanly as Paddy was,
and he was a great mouser. We buried all that was mortal of poor Pat in
the orchard and we are never going to forget him. We have resolved
that whenever the date of his death comes round we'll bow our heads and
pronounce his name at the hour of his funeral. If we are anywhere where
we can't say the name out loud we'll whisper it.


"Farewell, dearest Paddy, in all the years that are to be We'll cherish
your memory faithfully."[1]


MY MOST EXCITING ADVENTURE

My most exciting adventure was the day I fell off Uncle Roger's loft two
years ago. I wasn't excited until it was all over because I hadn't time
to be. The Story Girl and I were looking for eggs in the loft. It was
filled with wheat straw nearly to the roof and it was an awful distance
from us to the floor. And wheat straw is so slippery. I made a little
spring and the straw slipped from under my feet and there I was going
head first down from the loft. It seemed to me I was an awful long time
falling, but the Story Girl says I couldn't have been more than three
seconds. But I know that I thought five thoughts and there seemed to be
quite a long time between them. The first thing I thought was, what has
happened, because I really didn't know at first, it was so sudden. Then
after a spell I thought the answer, I am falling off the loft. And then
I thought, what will happen to me when I strike the floor, and after
another little spell I thought, I'll be killed. And then I thought,
well, I don't care. I really wasn't a bit frightened. I just was quite
willing to be killed. If there hadn't been a big pile of chaff on the
barn floor these words would never have been written. But there was and
I fell on it and wasn't a bit hurt, only my hair and mouth and eyes
and ears got all full of chaff. The strange part is that I wasn't a bit
frightened when I thought I was going to be killed, but after all the
danger was over I was awfully frightened and trembled so the Story Girl
had to help me into the house.

                                     FELICITY KING.


THE BATTLE OF THE PARTRIDGE EGGS

Once upon a time there lived about half a mile from a forrest a farmer
and his wife and his sons and daughters and a granddaughter. The farmer
and his wife loved this little girl very much but she caused them great
trouble by running away into the woods and they often spent haf days
looking for her. One day she wondered further into the forrest than
usual and she begun to be hungry. Then night closed in. She asked a fox
where she could get something to eat. The fox told her he knew where
there was a partridges nest and a bluejays nest full of eggs. So he led
her to the nests and she took five eggs out of each. When the birds came
home they missed the eggs and flew into a rage. The bluejay put on his
topcoat and was going to the partridge for law when he met the partridge
coming to him. They lit up a fire and commenced sining their deeds when
they heard a tremendous howl close behind them. They jumped up and put
out the fire and were immejutly attacked by five great wolves. The next
day the little girl was rambelling through the woods when they saw her
and took her prisoner. After she had confessed that she had stole the
eggs they told her to raise an army. They would have to fight over the
nests of eggs and whoever one would have the eggs. So the partridge
raised a great army of all kinds of birds except robins and the little
girl got all the robins and foxes and bees and wasps. And best of all
the little girl had a gun and plenty of ammunishun. The leader of her
army was a wolf. The result of the battle was that all the birds were
killed except the partridge and the bluejay and they were taken prisoner
and starved to death.

The little girl was then taken prisoner by a witch and cast into a
dunjun full of snakes where she died from their bites and people who
went through the forrest after that were taken prisoner by her ghost and
cast into the same dunjun where they died. About a year after the wood
turned into a gold castle and one morning everything had vanished except
a piece of a tree.

                                       PETER CRAIG.



(DAN, WITH A WHISTLE:--"Well, I guess nobody can say Peter can't write
fiction after THAT."

SARA RAY, WIPING AWAY HER TEARS:--"It's a very interesting story, but it
ends SO sadly."

FELIX:--"What made you call it The Battle of the Partridge Eggs when the
bluejay had just as much to do with it?"

PETER, SHORTLY:--"Because it sounded better that way."

FELICITY:--"Did she eat the eggs raw?"

SARA RAY:--"Poor little thing, I suppose if you're starving you can't be
very particular."

CECILY, SIGHING:--"I wish you'd let her go home safe, Peter, and not put
her to such a cruel death."

BEVERLEY:--"I don't quite understand where the little girl got her gun
and ammunition."

PETER, SUSPECTING THAT HE IS BEING MADE FUN OF:--"If you could write a
better story, why didn't you? I give you the chance."

THE STORY GIRL, WITH A PRETERNATURALLY SOLEMN FACE:--"You shouldn't
criticize Peter's story like that. It's a fairy tale, you know, and
anything can happen in a fairy tale."

FELICITY:--"There isn't a word about fairies in it!"

CECILY:--"Besides, fairy tales always end nicely and this doesn't."

PETER, SULKILY:--"I wanted to punish her for running away from home."

DAN:--"Well, I guess you did it all right."

CECILY:--"Oh, well, it was very interesting, and that is all that is
really necessary in a story." )


PERSONALS

Mr. Blair Stanley is visiting friends and relatives in Carlisle. He
intends returning to Europe shortly. His daughter, Miss Sara, will
accompany him.

Mr. Alan King is expected home from South America next month. His sons
will return with him to Toronto. Beverley and Felix have made hosts of
friends during their stay in Carlisle and will be much missed in social
circles.

The Mission Band of Carlisle Presbyterian Church completed their
missionary quilt last week. Miss Cecily King collected the largest sum
on her square. Congratulations, Cecily.

Mr. Peter Craig will be residing in Markdale after October and will
attend school there this winter. Peter is a good fellow and we all wish
him success and prosperity.

Apple picking is almost ended. There was an unusually heavy crop this
year. Potatoes, not so good.


HOUSEHOLD DEPARTMENT

Apple pies are the order of the day.

Eggs are a very good price now. Uncle Roger says it isn't fair to have
to pay as much for a dozen little eggs as a dozen big ones, but they go
just as far.

                                     FELICITY KING.


ETIQUETTE DEPARTMENT

F-l-t-y. Is it considered good form to eat peppermints in church? Ans.;
No, not if a witch gives them to you.

No, F-l-x, we would not call Treasure Island or the Pilgrim's Progress
dime novels.

Yes, P-t-r, when you call on a young lady and her mother offers you a
slice of bread and jam it is quite polite for you to accept it.

                                          DAN KING.


FASHION NOTES

Necklaces of roseberries are very much worn now.

It is considered smart to wear your school hat tilted over your left
eye.

Bangs are coming in. Em Frewen has them. She went to Summerside for a
visit and came back with them. All the girls in school are going to bang
their hair as soon as their mothers will let them. But I do not intend
to bang mine.

                                       CECILY KING.


(SARA RAY, DESPAIRINGLY:--"I know ma will never let ME have bangs.")


FUNNY PARAGRAPHS

D-n. What are details? C-l-y. I am not sure, but I think they are things
that are left over.

(CECILY, WONDERINGLY:--"I don't see why that was put among the
funny paragraphs. Shouldn't it have gone in the General Information
department?")

Old Mr. McIntyre's son on the Markdale Road had been very sick for
several years and somebody was sympathizing with him because his son was
going to die. "Oh," Mr. McIntyre said, quite easy, "he might as weel be
awa'. He's only retarding buzziness."

                                        FELIX KING.


GENERAL INFORMATION BUREAU

P-t-r. What kind of people live in uninhabited places?

Ans.: Cannibals, likely.

                                        FELIX KING.



[Footnote 1: The obituary was written by Mr. Felix King, but the two
lines of poetry were composed by Miss Sara Ray.]




CHAPTER XXXII. OUR LAST EVENING TOGETHER


IT was the evening before the day on which the Story Girl and Uncle
Blair were to leave us, and we were keeping our last tryst together
in the orchard where we had spent so many happy hours. We had made a
pilgrimage to all the old haunts--the hill field, the spruce wood, the
dairy, Grandfather King's willow, the Pulpit Stone, Pat's grave, and
Uncle Stephen's Walk; and now we foregathered in the sere grasses about
the old well and feasted on the little jam turnovers Felicity had made
that day specially for the occasion.

"I wonder if we'll ever all be together again," sighed Cecily.

"I wonder when I'll get jam turnovers like this again," said the Story
Girl, trying to be gay but not making much of a success of it.

"If Paris wasn't so far away I could send you a box of nice things
now and then," said Felicity forlornly, "but I suppose there's no use
thinking of that. Dear knows what they'll give you to eat over there."

"Oh, the French have the reputation of being the best cooks in the
world," rejoined the Story Girl, "but I know they can't beat your jam
turnovers and plum puffs, Felicity. Many a time I'll be hankering after
them."

"If we ever do meet again you'll be grown up," said Felicity gloomily.

"Well, you won't have stood still yourselves, you know."

"No, but that's just the worst of it. We'll all be different and
everything will be changed."

"Just think," said Cecily, "last New Year's Eve we were wondering what
would happen this year; and what a lot of things have happened that we
never expected. Oh, dear!"

"If things never happened life would be pretty dull," said the Story
Girl briskly. "Oh, don't look so dismal, all of you."

"It's hard to be cheerful when everybody's going away," sighed Cecily.

"Well, let's pretend to be, anyway," insisted the Story Girl. "Don't
let's think of parting. Let's think instead of how much we've laughed
this last year or so. I'm sure I shall never forget this dear old place.
We've had so many good times here."

"And some bad times, too," reminded Felix.

"Remember when Dan et the bad berries last summer?"

"And the time we were so scared over that bell ringing in the house,"
grinned Peter.

"And the Judgment Day," added Dan.

"And the time Paddy was bewitched," suggested Sara Ray.

"And when Peter was dying of the measles," said Felicity.

"And the time Jimmy Patterson was lost," said Dan. "Gee-whiz, but that
scared me out of a year's growth."

"Do you remember the time we took the magic seed," grinned Peter.

"Weren't we silly?" said Felicity. "I really can never look Billy
Robinson in the face when I meet him. I'm always sure he's laughing at
me in his sleeve."

"It's Billy Robinson who ought to be ashamed when he meets you or any of
us," commented Cecily severely. "I'd rather be cheated than cheat other
people."

"Do you mind the time we bought God's picture?" asked Peter.

"I wonder if it's where we buried it yet," speculated Felix.

"I put a stone over it, just as we did over Pat," said Cecily.

"I wish I could forget what God looks like," sighed Sara Ray. "I can't
forget it--and I can't forget what the bad place is like either, ever
since Peter preached that sermon on it."

"When you get to be a real minister you'll have to preach that sermon
over again, Peter," grinned Dan.

"My Aunt Jane used to say that people needed a sermon on that place once
in a while," retorted Peter seriously.

"Do you mind the night I et the cucumbers and milk to make me dream?"
said Cecily.

And therewith we hunted out our old dream books to read them again, and,
forgetful of coming partings, laughed over them till the old orchard
echoed to our mirth. When we had finished we stood in a circle around
the well and pledged "eternal friendship" in a cup of its unrivalled
water.

Then we joined hands and sang "Auld Lang Syne." Sara Ray cried bitterly
in lieu of singing.

"Look here," said the Story Girl, as we turned to leave the old orchard,
"I want to ask a favour of you all. Don't say good-bye to me tomorrow
morning."

"Why not?" demanded Felicity in astonishment.

"Because it's such a hopeless sort of word. Don't let's SAY it at all.
Just see me off with a wave of your hands. It won't seem half so bad
then. And don't any of you cry if you can help it. I want to remember
you all smiling."

We went out of the old orchard where the autumn night wind was beginning
to make its weird music in the russet boughs, and shut the little gate
behind us. Our revels there were ended.




CHAPTER XXXIII. THE STORY GIRL GOES


The morning dawned, rosy and clear and frosty. Everybody was up early,
for the travellers must leave in time to catch the nine o'clock train.
The horse was harnessed and Uncle Alec was waiting by the door. Aunt
Janet was crying, but everybody else was making a valiant effort not to.
The Awkward Man and Mrs. Dale came to see the last of their favourite.
Mrs. Dale had brought her a glorious sheaf of chrysanthemums, and the
Awkward Man gave her, quite gracefully, another little, old, limp book
from his library.

"Read it when you are sad or happy or lonely or discouraged or hopeful,"
he said gravely.

"He has really improved very much since he got married," whispered
Felicity to me.

Sara Stanley wore a smart new travelling suit and a blue felt hat with a
white feather. She looked so horribly grown up in it that we felt as if
she were lost to us already.

Sara Ray had vowed tearfully the night before that she would be up in
the morning to say farewell. But at this juncture Judy Pineau appeared
to say that Sara, with her usual luck, had a sore throat, and that her
mother consequently would not permit her to come. So Sara had written
her parting words in a three-cornered pink note.


  "My OWN DARLING FRIEND:--WORDS CANNOT EXPRESS my feelings over not
  being able to go up this morning to say good-bye to one I so
  FONDLY ADORE.  When I think that I cannot SEE YOU AGAIN my heart
  is almost TOO FULL FOR UTTERANCE.  But mother says I cannot and I
  MUST OBEY.  But I will be present IN SPIRIT.  It just BREAKS MY
  HEART that you are going SO FAR AWAY.  You have always been SO
  KIND to me and never hurt my feelings AS SOME DO and I shall miss
  you SO MUCH.  But I earnestly HOPE AND PRAY that you will be HAPPY
  AND PROSPEROUS wherever YOUR LOT IS CAST and not be seasick on THE
  GREAT OCEAN.  I hope you will find time AMONG YOUR MANY DUTIES to
  write me a letter ONCE IN A WHILE.  I shall ALWAYS REMEMBER YOU
  and please remember me.  I hope we WILL MEET AGAIN sometime, but
  if not may we meet in A FAR BETTER WORLD where there are no SAD
  PARTINGS.

  "Your true and loving friend,

                                           "SARA RAY"


"Poor little Sara," said the Story Girl, with a queer catch in her
voice, as she slipped the tear-blotted note into her pocket. "She isn't
a bad little soul, and I'm sorry I couldn't see her once more, though
maybe it's just as well for she'd have to cry and set us all off. I
WON'T cry. Felicity, don't you dare. Oh, you dear, darling people, I
love you all so much and I'll go on loving you always."

"Mind you write us every week at the very least," said Felicity, winking
furiously.

"Blair, Blair, watch over the child well," said Aunt Janet. "Remember,
she has no mother."

The Story Girl ran over to the buggy and climbed in. Uncle Blair
followed her. Her arms were full of Mrs. Dale's chrysanthemums, held
close up to her face, and her beautiful eyes shone softly at us over
them. No good-byes were said, as she wished. We all smiled bravely and
waved our hands as they drove out of the lane and down the moist red
road into the shadows of the fir wood in the valley. But we still stood
there, for we knew we should see the Story Girl once more. Beyond the
fir wood was an open curve in the road and she had promised to wave a
last farewell as they passed around it.

We watched the curve in silence, standing in a sorrowful little group
in the sunshine of the autumn morning. The delight of the world had been
ours on the golden road. It had enticed us with daisies and rewarded
us with roses. Blossom and lyric had waited on our wishes. Thoughts,
careless and sweet, had visited us. Laughter had been our comrade and
fearless Hope our guide. But now the shadow of change was over it.

"There she is," cried Felicity.

The Story Girl stood up and waved her chrysanthemums at us. We waved
wildly back until the buggy had driven around the curve. Then we went
slowly and silently back to the house. The Story Girl was gone.





